<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 4O - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter <span class="text_deleted">4H</span><span class="text_added">4O</span>. Traffic Control Signals for One-Lane, Two-Way Facilities</h1>

    <h3 id="section4O01">Section <span class="text_deleted">4H.01</span><span class="text_added">4O.01</span> Application of Traffic Control Signals for One-Lane, Two-Way Facilities</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4O01_para01">01</span><span class="support">A traffic control signal at a narrow bridge, tunnel, or roadway section is a special signal that <span class="text_deleted">assigns the right-of-way for</span><span class="text_added">alternates which direction of</span> vehicles passing over a bridge or through a tunnel or roadway section that is not of sufficient width for two opposing vehicles to pass<span class="text_added"> is directed to stop and which direction is permitted to proceed</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4O01_para02">02</span><span class="support">Temporary traffic control signals (see <a href="part4d.xhtml#section4D10">Sections 4D.<span class="text_added">10</span><span class="text_deleted">32</span></a> and <a href="part6l.xhtml#section6L01"><span class="text_deleted">6F.84</span><span class="text_added">6L.01</span></a>) are the most frequent application of one-lane, two-way facilities.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4O01_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Sight distance across or through the one-lane, two-way facility should be considered as well as the approach speed and sight distance approaching the facility when determining whether traffic control signals should be installed.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4O01_para04">04</span><span class="option">At a narrow bridge, tunnel, or roadway section where a traffic control signal is not justified under the conditions of <a href="part4c.xhtml">Chapter 4C</a>, a traffic control signal may be used if gaps in opposing traffic do not permit the flow of traffic through the one-lane section of roadway.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4O02">Section <span class="text_deleted">4H.02</span><span class="text_added">4O.02</span> Design of Traffic Control Signals for One-Lane, Two-Way Facilities</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4O02_para01">01</span><span class="standard">The provisions of <a href="part4d.xhtml">Chapter<span class="text_added">s</span> 4D</a><span class="text_added">through <a href="part4m.xhtml">4G</a></span> shall apply to traffic control signals for one-lane, two-way facilities, except that:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Durations of red clearance intervals shall be adequate to clear the one-lane section of conflicting vehicles.</li>

      <li>Adequate means, such as interconnection, shall be provided to prevent conflicting signal indications, such as green and green, at opposite ends of the section.</li>
    </ol>

    <h3 id="section4O03">Section <span class="text_deleted">4H.03</span><span class="text_added">4O.03</span> Operation of Traffic Control Signals for One-Lane, Two-Way Facilities</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4O03_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Traffic control signals at one-lane, two-way facilities shall operate in a manner consistent with traffic requirements.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4O03_para02">02</span><span class="standard">When in the flashing mode, the signal indications shall flash red.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4O03_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Adequate time should be provided to allow traffic to clear the narrow facility before opposing traffic is allowed to move. Engineering judgment should be used to determine the proper timing for the signal.</span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>