<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 1C - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1><span class="text_added">Chapter 1C. Definitions, Acronymns, and Abbreviations Used in this Manual</span></h1>

    
    <h3 id="section1C01">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.01</span> Definitions of Headings<span class="text_deleted">, Words, and Phrases</span><span class="text_added">Used</span> in this Manual</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1C01_para01">01</span><span class="standard">When used in this Manual, the text headings of Standard, Guidance, Option, and Support shall be defined as follows:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Standard—a statement of required, mandatory, or specifically prohibitive practice regarding a traffic control device. <span class="text_added">In limited, location-specific cases, the results of a documented engineering study (see Section 1D.05) might indicate a deviation from one or more requirements of a Standard provision to be appropriate.</span> <span class="note">Based on Official Ruling no. 1(09)-1(I)</span> All Standard statements are labeled, and the text appears in bold type. The verb “shall” is typically used. The verbs “should” and “may” are not used in Standard statements. Standard statements are sometimes modified by Option<span class="text_deleted">s</span><span class="text_added"> statements</span>.</li>

      <li>Guidance—a statement of recommended<span class="text_deleted">, but not mandatory,</span> practice in typical situations, with deviations allowed if engineering judgment or engineering study <span class="text_added">(see Section 1D.05) </span>indicates the deviation to be appropriate. All Guidance statements are labeled, and the text appears in unbold type. The verb “should” is typically used. The verbs “shall” and “may” are not used in Guidance statements. Guidance statements are sometimes modified by Option<span class="text_deleted">s</span><span class="text_added"> statements</span>.</li>

      <li>Option—a statement of practice that is a permissive condition and carries no requirement or recommendation. Option statements sometime<span class="text_added">s</span> contain allowable modifications to a Standard or Guidance statement. All Option statements are labeled, and the text appears in unbold type. The verb “may” is typically used. The verbs “shall” and “should” are not used in Option statements.</li>

      <li>Support—an informational statement that does not convey any degree of mandate, recommendation, authorization, prohibition, or enforceable condition. Support statements are labeled, and the text appears in unbold type. The verbs “shall,” “should,” and “may” are not used in Support statements.</li>
    </ol>

	<h3 id="section1C02"><span class="text_added">Section 1C.02 Definitions of Words and Phrases Used in this Manual</span></h3>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label"><span class="text_added">Standard:</span></span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1C02_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">Unless otherwise defined in this Section, or in other Parts of this Manual, words or phrases shall have the meaning(s) as defined in the most recent editions of the “Uniform Vehicle Code,” “AASHTO Transportation Glossary (Highway Definitions),” and other publications <span class="text_deleted">mentioned</span><span class="text_added">referenced</span>in <a href="#section1A05">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.11</span><span class="text_added">1A.05</span></a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A13_para03">03</span><span class="standard">The following words and phrases, when used in this Manual, shall have the following meanings:</span></p>

    <ol class="standard">
      <li>Accessible Pedestrian Signal—a device that communicates information about pedestrian signal timing in non-visual format such as audible tones, speech messages, and/or vibrating surfaces.</li>

      <li>Accessible Pedestrian Signal Detector—a device designated to assist the pedestrian who has visual or physical disabilities in activating the pedestrian phase.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Active Grade Crossing—a grade crossing equipped with automatic traffic control devices, such as flashing-light signals, gates, and/or traffic control signals, that are activated upon the detection of approaching rail traffic.</li></span>

      <li>Actuated<span class="text_deleted"> Operation</span>—a type of traffic control signal operation in which some or all signal phases are operated on the basis of actuation.</li>

      <li>Actuation—initiation of<span class="text_added">,</span> a change in<span class="text_added">,</span> or <span class="text_added">an </span>extension of a traffic signal phase <span class="text_added">or a sign legend </span>through the operation of any type of detector.</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>Advance Preemption—the notification of approaching rail traffic that is forwarded to the highway traffic signal controller unit or assembly by the railroad or light rail transit equipment in advance of the activation of the railroad or light rail transit warning devices.</li>

      <li>Advance Preemption Time—the period of time that is the difference between the required maximum highway traffic signal preemption time and the activation of the railroad or light rail transit warning devices.</li></span>

      <li>Advisory Speed—a recommended speed for all vehicles operating on a section of highway and based on the highway design, operating characteristics, and conditions.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Agency—an organization with the responsibility for providing, maintaining, and/or operating a public or private road system.</li></span>

      <li>Alley—a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in urban areas and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.</li>

      <li>Altered Speed Zone—a speed limit, other than a statutory speed limit, that is based upon an engineering study.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Application—in regard to a traffic control device, the act of deciding to use a device, generally or at a particular location for a particular condition.</li></span>

      <li>Approach—all lanes of traffic moving toward an intersection or a midblock location from one direction, including any adjacent parking lane(s).</li>

      <li>Arterial Highway (Street)—a general term denoting a highway primarily used by through traffic, usually on a continuous route or a highway designated as part of an arterial system.</li>

      <li>Attended Lane (Manual Lane)—a toll lane adjacent to a toll booth occupied by a human toll collector who makes change, issues receipts, and perform other toll-related functions. Attended lanes at toll plazas typically require vehicles to stop to pay the toll.</li>

      <li>Automatic Lane—see Exact Change Lane.</li>

      <li>Average Annual Daily Traffic (AADT)—the total volume of traffic passing a point or segment of a highway facility in both directions for one year divided by the number of days in the year. Normally, periodic daily traffic volumes are adjusted for hours of the day counted, days of the week, and seasons of the year to arrive at average annual daily traffic.</li>

      <li>Average Daily Traffic (ADT)—the average 24 hour volume, being the total volume during a stated period divided by the number of days in that period. Normally, this would be periodic daily traffic volumes over several days, not adjusted for days of the week or seasons of the year.</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>Average Day—a day representing traffic volumes normally and repeatedly found at a location, typically a weekday when volumes are influenced by employment or a weekend day when volumes are influenced by entertainment or recreation.</li></span>

      <li>Backplate—see Signal Backplate.</li>

      <li>Barrier-Separated Lane—a preferential lane or other special purpose lane that is separated from the adjacent general-purpose lane(s) by a physical barrier.</li>

      <li>Beacon—a highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that operates in a flashing mode.</li>

      <li>Bicycle—a pedal-powered vehicle upon which the human operator sits.</li>

      <li>Bicycle Facilities—a general term denoting improvements and provisions that accommodate or encourage bicycling, including parking and storage facilities, and shared roadways not specifically defined for bicycle use.</li>

      <li>Bicycle Lane—a portion of a roadway that has been designated for preferential or exclusive use by bicyclists by pavement markings and, if used, signs.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Bicycle Signal Face—a signal face that displays only bicycle symbol indications, that exclusively controls a bicycle movement from a designated bicycle lane or from a separate facility such as a shared use path, and that displays signal indications that are applicable only to the bicycle movement.</li></span>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Bicycle Symbol Signal Indication—a red, yellow, or green signal indication that displays a bicycle symbol rather than a circular or arrow indication.</li></span>

      <li>Bikeway—a generic term for any road, street, path, or way that in some manner is specifically designated for bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or are to be shared with other transportation modes.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Blank-Out Sign—a sign that displays a single predetermined message only when activated. When not activated, the sign legend is not visible.</li></span>

      <li>Buffer-Separated Lane—a preferential lane or other special purpose lane that is separated from the adjacent general-purpose lane(s) by a pattern of standard longitudinal pavement markings that is wider than a normal or wide lane line marking. The buffer area might include rumble strips, textured pavement, or channelizing devices such as tubular markers or traversable curbs, but does not include a physical barrier.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Busway—traveled way that is used exclusively by buses.</li></span>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>Cantilevered Signal Structure—a structure, also referred to as a mast arm, that is rigidly attached to a vertical pole and is used to provide overhead support of highway traffic signal faces or grade crossing signal units.</li></span>

      <li>Center Line Markings—the yellow pavement marking line(s) that delineates the separation of traffic lanes that have opposite directions of travel on a roadway. These markings need not be at the geometrical center of the pavement.</li>

      <li>Changeable Message Sign—a sign that is capable of displaying more than one message (one of which might be a “blank” display), changeable manually, by remote control, or by automatic control. Electronic-display changeable message signs are referred to as Dynamic Message Signs in the National Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) Architecture and are referred to as Variable Message Signs in the National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) standards publication.</li>

      <li>Channelizing Line<span class="text_deleted"> Markings</span>—a wide or double solid white line <span class="text_added">marking </span>used to form islands where traffic in the same direction of travel is permitted on both sides of the island.</li>

      <li>Circular Intersection—an intersection that has an island, generally circular in design, located in the center of the intersection where traffic passes to the right of the island. Circular intersections include roundabouts, rotaries, and traffic circles.</li>

      <li>Circulatory Roadway—the roadway within a circular intersection on which traffic travels in a counterclockwise direction around an island in the center of the circular intersection.</li>

      <li>Clear Storage Distance—when used in <a href="part8_toc.html">Part 8</a>, the distance available for vehicle storage measured between 6 feet from the rail nearest the intersection to the intersection stop line or the normal stopping point on the highway. At skewed grade crossings and intersections, the 6-foot distance shall be measured perpendicular to the nearest rail either along the center line or edge line of the highway, as appropriate, to obtain the shorter distance. Where exit gates are used, the distance available for vehicle storage is measured from the point where the rear of the vehicle would be clear of the exit gate arm. In cases where the exit gate arm is parallel to the track(s) and is not perpendicular to the highway, the distance is measured either along the center line or edge line of the highway, as appropriate, to obtain the shorter distance.</li>

      <li>Clear Zone—the total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the traveled way, that is available for an errant driver to stop or regain control of a vehicle. This area might consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, and/or a non-recoverable, traversable slope with a clear run-out area at its toe.</li>

      <li>Collector Highway—a term denoting a highway that in rural areas connects small towns and local highways to arterial highways, and in urban areas provides land access and traffic circulation within residential, commercial, and business areas and connects local highways to the arterial highways.</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>Concurrent Flow Preferential Lane—a preferential lane that is operated in the same direction as the adjacent mixed flow lanes, separated from the adjacent general-purpose freeway lanes by a standard lane stripe, painted buffer, or barrier.</li></span>

      <li>Conflict Monitor—a device used to detect and respond to improper or conflicting signal indications and improper operating voltages in a traffic controller assembly.</li>

      <li>Constant Warning Time <span class="text_added">Train </span>Detection—a means of detecting rail traffic that provides relatively uniform warning time for the approach of <span class="text_added">through </span>trains <span class="text_deleted">or light rail transit traffic </span>that are not accelerating or decelerating after being detected.</li>

      <li>Contiguous Lane—a lane, preferential or otherwise, that is separated from the adjacent lane(s) only by a normal or wide lane line marking.</li>

      <li>Controller Assembly—a complete electrical device mounted in a cabinet for controlling the operation of a highway traffic signal.</li>

      <li>Controller Unit—that part of a controller assembly that is devoted to the selection and timing of the display of signal indications.</li>

      <li>Conventional Road—a street or highway other than a<span class="text_added">n</span> <span class="text_deleted">low-volume road (as defined in <a href="part5a.xhtml#section5A01">Section 5A.01</a>),</span> expressway<span class="text_deleted">,</span> or freeway.</li>

      <li>Counter-Flow Lane—a lane operating in a direction opposite to the normal flow of traffic designated for peak direction of travel during at least a portion of the day. Counter-flow lanes are usually separated from the off-peak direction lanes by tubular markers or other flexible channelizing devices, temporary lane separators, or movable or permanent barrier.</li>

      <li>Crashworthy—<span class="text_deleted">a characteristic</span><span class="text_added">the ability</span> of a roadside <span class="text_added">safety hardware device or </span>appurtenance that <span class="text_deleted">has been successfully crash tested in accordance with a national standard such as the National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report 350, “Recommended Procedures for the Safety Performance Evaluation of Highway Features.”</span><span class="text_added">is intended to minimize risks to design vehicle occupants by allowing a vehicle impacting the appurtenance to be slowed, slowed before stopping, redirected, or to continue without significant resistance. Acceptable performance of a crashworthy device is determined by a nationally established standard. Roadside appurtenances include permanent and portable sign supports, other permanent or temporary traffic control devices, and other roadside fixtures that are not traffic control devices, such as longitudinal barriers, bridge railings, barricades, crash cushions, within the clear zone. Information on the FHWA's policy on crashworthiness of devices on the National Highway System and other roadways is available at the FHWA Office of Safety Web site at <a href="https://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/roadway_dept/countermeasures/reduce_crash_severity/policy_memo_guidance.cfm">https://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/roadway_dept/countermeasures/reduce_crash_severity/policy_memo_guidance.cfm.</a></span></li>

      <li>Crosswalk—(a) that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of the roadway, the part of a roadway included within the extension of the lateral lines of the sidewalk at right angles to the center line; (b) any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated as a pedestrian crossing by pavement marking lines on the surface, which might be supplemented by contrasting pavement texture, style, or color.</li>

      <li>Crosswalk Lines—white pavement marking lines that identify a crosswalk.</li>

      <li>Cycle Length—the time required for one complete sequence of signal indications.</li>

      <li>Dark Mode—the lack of all signal indications at a signalized location. (The dark mode is most commonly associated with power failures, ramp meters, hybrid beacons, beacons, and some movable bridge signals.)</li>

      <li>Delineator—a retroreflective device mounted <span class="text_deleted">on the roadway surface or </span>at the side of the roadway in a series to indicate the alignment of the roadway, especially at night or in adverse weather.</li>

      <li>Design Vehicle—the longest vehicle permitted by statute of the road authority (State or other) on that roadway.</li>

      <li>Designated Bicycle Route—a system of bikeways designated by the jurisdiction having authority with appropriate directional and informational route signs, with or without specific bicycle route numbers.</li>

      <li>Detectable—having a continuous edge within 6 inches of the surface so that pedestrians who have visual disabilities can sense its presence and receive usable guidance information.</li>

      <li>Detector—a device used for determining the presence or passage of vehicles or pedestrians.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Diagnostic Team—a group of knowledgeable representatives of the parties of interest in a grade crossing or group of grade crossings (see 23 CFR Section 109, Part 646.204).</li></span>

      <li>Downstream—a term that refers to a location that is encountered by traffic subsequent to an upstream location as it flows in an “upstream to downstream” direction. For example, “the downstream end of a lane line separating the turn lane from a through lane on the approach to an intersection” is the end of the lane line that is closest to the intersection.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Driveway—an access from a roadway to a building, site, or abutting property.</li></span>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Driving Aisle—circulation area for motor vehicles within a parking area, typically between rows of parking spaces. Driving aisle provide a one-way or two-way travel. Driving aisles are exempted from compliance with MUTCD provisions.</li></span>

      <li>Dropped Lane—a through lane that becomes a mandatory turn lane on a conventional roadway, or a through lane that becomes a mandatory exit lane on a freeway or expressway. The end of an acceleration lane and reductions in the number of through lanes that do not involve a mandatory turn or exit are not considered dropped lanes.</li>

      <li>Dual-Arrow Signal Section—a type of signal section designed to include both a yellow arrow and a green arrow.</li>

      <li>Dynamic Envelope—the clearance required for light rail transit traffic or a train and its cargo overhang due to any combination of loading, lateral motion, or suspension failure (see <a href="part8b.xhtml#figure8B08">Figure 8B-8</a>).</li>

      <li>Dynamic Exit Gate Operating Mode—a mode of operation where the exit gate operation is based on the presence of vehicles within the minimum track clearance distance.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Dynamic Message Sign—see Changeable Message Sign.</li></span>

      <li>Edge Line Markings—white or yellow pavement marking lines that delineate the right or left edge(s) of a traveled way.</li>

      <li>Electronic Toll Collection (ETC)—a system for automated collection of tolls from moving or stopped vehicles through wireless technologies such as radio-frequency communication or optical scanning.&#160; ETC systems are classified as one of the following: (1) systems that require users to have registered toll accounts, with the use of equipment inside or on the exterior of vehicles, such as a transponder or barcode decal, that communicates with or is detected by roadside or overhead receiving equipment, or with the use of license plate optical scanning, to automatically deduct the toll from the registered user account, or (2) systems that do not require users to have registered toll accounts because vehicle license plates are optically scanned and invoices for the toll amount are sent through postal mail to the address of the vehicle owner.</li>

      <li>Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) Account Only Lane—a non-attended toll lane that is restricted to use only by vehicles with a registered toll payment account.</li>

      <li>Emergency-Vehicle Hybrid Beacon—a special type of hybrid beacon used to warn and control traffic at an unsignalized location to assist authorized emergency vehicles in entering or crossing a street or highway.</li>

      <li>Emergency-Vehicle Traffic Control Signal—a special traffic control signal that <span class="text_deleted">assigns the right-of-way to</span><span class="text_added">directs all conflicting traffic to stop in order to permit the driver of</span> an authorized emergency vehicle<span class="text_added"> to proceed into the roadway or intersection</span>.</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>End-of-Roadway Marker—a device used to warn and alert road users of the end of a roadway in other than temporary traffic control zones.</li></span>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Engineer—see Professional Engineer.</li></span>

      <li>Engineering Judgment—the evaluation of available pertinent information, and the application of appropriate principles, provisions, and practices as contained in this Manual and other sources, for the purpose of deciding upon the <span class="text_added">appearance, use, installation, or</span><span class="text_deleted">applicability, design,</span> operation<span class="text_deleted">, or installation</span> of a traffic control device. Engineering judgment shall be exercised by <span class="text_deleted">an</span><span class="text_added">a professional</span> engineer<span class="text_added"> (see Definition 169) with appropriate traffic engineering expertise</span>, or by an individual working under the supervision of <span class="text_added">such </span>an engineer, through the application of procedures and criteria established by the engineer. Documentation of engineering judgment is not required.</li>

      <li>Engineering Study—the <span class="text_deleted">comprehensive </span>analysis and evaluation of available pertinent information, and the application of appropriate principles, provisions, and practices as contained in this Manual and other sources, for the purpose of deciding upon the <span class="text_added">appearance, use, installation, or</span><span class="text_deleted">applicability, design,</span> operation<span class="text_deleted">, or installation</span> of a traffic control device. An engineering study shall be performed by an engineer, or by an individual working under the supervision of <span class="text_deleted">an</span><span class="text_added">a professional</span> engineer<span class="text_added"> (see Definition 169) with appropriate traffic engineering expertise, or by an individual working under the supervision of such an engineer</span>, through the application of procedures and criteria established by the engineer. An engineering study shall be documented<span class="text_added"> in writing</span>.</li>

      <li>Entrance Gate—an automatic gate that can be lowered across the lanes approaching a grade crossing to block road users from entering the grade crossing.</li>

      <li>Exact Change Lane (Automatic Lane)—a non-attended toll lane that has a receptacle into which road users deposit coins totaling the exact amount of the toll. Exact Change lanes at toll plazas typically require vehicles to stop to pay the toll.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Exclusive Alignment—a light rail transit track(s) or a bus rapid transit busway that is grade-separated or protected by a fence or traffic barrier. No grade crossings exist along the track(s) or busway. Motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians are prohibited within the right-of-way. Subways and elevated structures are included within this definition.</li></span>

      <li>Exit Gate—an automatic gate that can be lowered across the lanes departing a grade crossing to block road users from entering the grade crossing by driving in the opposing traffic lanes.</li>

      <li>Exit Gate Clearance Time—for Four-Quadrant Gate systems at grade crossings, the amount of time provided to delay the descent of the exit gate arm(s) after entrance gate arm(s) begin to descend.</li>

      <li>Exit Gate Operating Mode—for Four-Quadrant Gate systems at grade crossings, the mode of control used to govern the operation of the exit gate arms.</li>

      <li>Expressway—a divided highway with partial control of access.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Fail-Safe—when used in Part 8, a railroad signal design philosophy applied to a system or device such that the result of a hardware failure or the effect of a software error shall either prohibit the system or device from assuming or maintaining an unsafe state or shall cause the system or device to assume a state that is known to be safe.</li></span>

      <li>Flagger—a person who actively controls the flow of vehicular traffic into and/or through a temporary traffic control zone using hand-signaling devices or an Automated Flagger Assistance Device (AFAD).</li>

      <li>Flasher—a device used to turn highway traffic signal indications on and off at a repetitive rate of approximately once per second.</li>

      <li>Flashing—an operation in which a light source, such as a traffic signal indication<span class="text_added"> or LEDs in a sign</span>, is turned on and off repetitively.</li>

      <li>Flashing-Light Signals—a warning device consisting of two red signal indications arranged horizontally that are activated to flash alternately when rail traffic is approaching or present at a grade crossing.</li>

      <li>Flashing Mode—a mode of operation in which at least one traffic signal indication in each vehicular signal face of a highway traffic signal is turned on and off repetitively.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Four-Quadrant Gate System—an exit gate system that includes entrance and exit gates that control and block road users on all lanes entering and exiting the grade crossing.</li></span>

      <li>Freeway—a divided highway with full control of access.</li>

      <li>Full-Actuated<span class="text_deleted"> Operation</span>—a type of traffic control signal operation in which all signal phases function on the basis of actuation.</li>

      <li>Gate—an automatically-operated or manually-operated traffic control device that is used to physically obstruct road users such that they are discouraged from proceeding past a particular point on a roadway or pathway, or such that they are discouraged from entering a particular grade crossing, ramp, lane, roadway, or facility.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>General-Purpose Lane—a highway lane or set of lanes, other than a preferential lane (see Definition No. 169), on which all or most traffic that is allowed on that highway is also allowed use. Certain classes of vehicles, such as commercial vehicles or vehicles exceeding a certain weight, might be prohibited from using one or more of the general-purpose lanes. A general-purpose lane might also be restricted to certain uses, such as passing or turning.</li></span>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Gore Area—see Physical Gore, Theoretical Gore.</li></span>

      <li>Grade Crossing—the general area where a highway and a railroad and/or light rail transit route cross at the same level, within which are included the tracks, highway, and traffic control devices for traffic traversing that area.</li>

		<li><span class="text_deleted">Active </span>Grade Crossing Warning System—the flashing-light signals, with or without <span class="text_deleted">warning</span><span class="text_added">automatic</span> gates, together with the necessary control equipment used to inform road users of the approach or presence of rail traffic at grade crossings.<span class="note"> Name changed; moved in alphabetical order</span></li>

		
      <li>Guide Sign—a sign that shows route designations, <span class="text_added">highway names, </span>destinations, directions, distances, services, points of interest, or other geographical, recreational, or cultural information.</li>

      <li>High-Occupancy Vehicle (HOV)—a motor vehicle carrying at least two or more persons, including carpools, vanpools, and buses.</li>

      <li>Highway—a general term for denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel, including the entire area within the right-of-way.</li>

      <li>Highway-Light Rail Transit Grade Crossing—the general area where a highway and a light rail transit route cross at the same level, within which are included the light rail transit tracks, highway, and traffic control devices for traffic traversing that area.</li>

      <li>Highway-Rail Grade Crossing—the general area where a highway and a railroad cross at the same level, within which are included the railroad tracks, highway, and traffic control devices for highway traffic traversing that area.</li>

      <li>Highway Traffic Signal—a power-operated traffic control device by which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. These devices do not include power-operated signs, steadily-illuminated pavement markers, <span class="text_added">gates, flashing light signals (see <a href="part8D.xhtml#section8D03">Section 8D.03</a>), </span>warning lights (see <a href="../../#section6L07">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.83</span><span class="text_added">6L.07</span></a>), or steady burning electric lamps.</li>

      <li>HOV Lane—any preferential lane designated for exclusive use by high-occupancy vehicles for all or part of a day—including a designated lane on a freeway, other highway, street, or independent roadway on a separate right-of-way.</li>

      <li>Hybrid Beacon—a special type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark mode (no indications displayed) between periods of operation and, when operated, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal indications.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Identification Marker—a shape, color, and/or pictograph that is used as a visual identifier for a destination guide signing system of a community wayfinding system or a shared-use path system for an area.</li></span>

      <li>Inherently Low Emission Vehicle (ILEV)—any kind of vehicle that, because of inherent properties of the fuel system design, will not have significant evaporative emissions, even if its evaporative emission control system has failed.</li>

      <li>In-Roadway Lights—a special type of highway traffic signal installed in the roadway surface to warn road users that they are approaching a condition on or adjacent to the roadway that might not be readily apparent and might require the road users to <span class="text_deleted">slow down</span><span class="text_added">reduce speed</span> and/or come to a stop.</li>

      <li>Interchange—a system of interconnecting roadways providing for traffic movement between two or more highways that do not intersect at grade.</li>

      <li>Interconnection—when used in <a href="part8_toc.html">Part 8</a>, the electrical connection between the railroad or light rail transit active warning system and the highway traffic signal controller assembly for the purpose of preemption.</li>

      <li>Intermediate Interchange—an interchange with an urban or rural route that is not a major or minor interchange as defined in this Section.</li>

      <li>Intersection—intersection is defined as follows: 

      <ol type="a">
        <li>The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling on different highways that join at any other angle might come into conflict.</li>

        <li>The junction of an alley<span class="text_added">,</span> <span class="text_deleted">or </span>driveway<span class="text_added">, or side roadway</span> with a <span class="text_added">public </span>roadway or highway shall not constitute an intersection, unless the <span class="text_added">public </span>roadway or highway at said junction is controlled by a traffic control device.</li>

        <li>If a highway includes two roadways <span class="text_added">separated by a median</span><span class="text_deleted">that are 30 feet or more apart (see definition of Median)</span>, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be a separate intersection<span class="text_added"> if the opposing left-turn paths cross and there is sufficient interior storage for the design vehicle. (see <span class="known_error_added">Figure 2A-XX</span>)</span>.</li>

        <span class="text_deleted"><li>If both intersecting highways include two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two roadways of such highways shall be a separate intersection.</li></span>

        <li>At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of the distance between the separate intersections as defined in (c)<span class="text_deleted"> and (d)</span> above: 

        <ol>
          <li>If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated on the roadway (within the median) between the separate intersections, the two intersections and the roadway (median) between them shall be considered as one intersection;</li>

          <li>Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk is designated on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and/or beyond the designated stop line or yield line shall be part of the intersection; and</li>

          <li>Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure from the intersection, the intersection shall include the area extending to the far side of such crosswalk.</li>
        </ol></li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Intersection Control Beacon—a beacon used only at an intersection to control two or more directions of travel.</li>

      <li>Interval—the part of a signal cycle during which signal indications do not change.</li>

      
      <li>Island—a defined area between traffic lanes for control of vehicular movements, for toll collection, or for pedestrian refuge. It includes all end protection and approach treatments. Within an intersection area, a median or an outer separation is considered to be an island.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Jughandle Turn—a left-turn or U-turn that, in conjunction with special geometry, is made by initially making a right-turn or diverging to the right. With other special geometry, a right-turn or U-turn makes a jughandle turn by initially making a left-turn or diverting to the left.</li></span>

      <li>Lane Drop—see Dropped Lane.</li>

      <li>Lane Line Markings—white pavement marking lines that delineate the separation of traffic lanes that have the same direction of travel on a roadway.</li>

      <li>Lane-Use Control Signal—a signal face displaying indications to permit or prohibit the use of specific lanes of a roadway or to indicate the impending prohibition of such use.</li>

      <li>Legend—see Sign Legend.</li>

      <li>Lens—see Signal Lens.</li>

      <li>Light Rail Transit Traffic (Light Rail Transit Equipment)—every device in, upon, or by which any person or property can be transported on light rail transit tracks, including single-unit light rail transit cars (such at streetcars and trolleys) and assemblies of multiple light rail transit cars coupled together.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Loading Zone—a specially marked, signed or designated area for the loading or unloading of vehicles (passenger or freight).</li></span>

      <li>Locomotive Horn—an air horn, steam whistle, or similar audible warning device (see 49 CFR Part 229.129) mounted on a locomotive or control cab car. The terms “locomotive horn,” “train whistle,” “locomotive whistle,” and “train horn” are used interchangeably in the railroad industry.</li>

      <li>Logo—a distinctive emblem or trademark that identifies a commercial <span class="text_added">or non-commercial </span>business<span class="text_added">, program, or organization</span><span class="text_deleted"> and/or the product or service offered by the business</span>.</li>

      <li>Longitudinal Markings—pavement markings that are generally placed parallel and adjacent to the flow of traffic such as lane lines, center lines, edge lines, channelizing lines, and others.</li>

      <li>Louver—see Signal Louver.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Low-Volume Rural Road—a category of paved or unpaved conventional or special-purpose roadways having an AADT or less than 400 vehicles and lying outside of built-up or urbanized areas of cities, towns, and communities.</li></span>

      <li>Major Interchange—an interchange with another freeway or expressway, or an interchange with a high-volume multi-lane highway, principal urban arterial, or major rural route where the interchanging traffic is heavy or includes many road users unfamiliar with the area.</li>

      <li>Major Street—the street normally carrying the higher volume of vehicular traffic.</li>

      <li>Malfunction Management Unit—same as Conflict Monitor.</li>

      <li>Managed Lane—a highway lane or set of lanes, or a highway facility, for which variable operational strategies such as direction of travel, tolling, pricing, and/or vehicle type or occupancy requirements are implemented and managed in real-time in response to changing conditions. Managed lanes are typically buffer- or barrier-separated lanes parallel to the general-purpose lanes of a highway in which access is restricted to designated locations. There are also some highways on which all lanes are managed.</li>

      <li>Manual Lane—see Attended Lane.</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>Maximum Highway Traffic Signal Preemption Time—the maximum amount of time needed following initiation of the preemption sequence for the highway traffic signals to complete the timing of the right-of-way transfer time, queue clearance time, and separation time.</li></span>

      <li>Median—<span class="text_added">the portion of a highway separating opposing directions of the traveled way. </span>the area between two roadways of a divided highway measured from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way. The median excludes turn lanes. The median width might be different between intersections, interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.</li>

      <li>Minimum Track Clearance Distance—<span class="text_deleted">for standard two-quadrant warning devices, the minimum track clearance distance is </span>the length along a highway <span class="text_added">over the track(s) where a vehicle could be struck by rail traffic</span><span class="text_deleted">at one or more railroad or light rail transit tracks, measured from the highway stop line, warning device, or 12 feet perpendicular to the track center line, to 6 feet beyond the track(s) measured perpendicular to the far rail, along the center line or edge line of the highway, as appropriate, to obtain the longer distance</span>. <span class="text_added">The minimum track clearance distance is measured from a point upstream from the track(s0 on the approach to the grade crossing to a point downstream from the track(s) on the departure from the grade crossing. The length along the highway between the two points is the minimum track clearance distance.</span><span class="text_deleted">For Four-Quadrant Gate systems, the minimum track clearance distance is the length along a highway at one or more railroad or light rail transit tracks, measured either from the highway stop line or entrance warning device, to the point where the rear of the vehicle would be clear of the exit gate arm. In cases where the exit gate arm is parallel to the track(s) and is not perpendicular to the highway, the distance is measured either along the center line or edge line of the highway, as appropriate, to obtain the longer distance.</span></li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>Minimum Warning Time—when used in <a href="part8_toc.html">Part 8</a>, the least amount of time active warning devices shall operate prior to the arrival of rail traffic at a grade crossing.</li></span>

      <li>Minor Interchange—an interchange where traffic is local and very light, such as interchanges with land service access roads. Where the sum of the exit volumes is estimated to be lower than 100 vehicles per day in the design year, the interchange is classified as local.</li>

      <li>Minor Street—the street normally carrying the lower volume of vehicular traffic.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Mixed-Use Alignment—a light rail transit track(s), a busway, or a bus only lane(s) where the LRT or BRT vehicles operate in mixed traffic with all types of road users. This includes streets, transit malls and pedestrian malls where the right-of-way is shared. In a mixed-use alignment, the light rail transit or the bus rapid transit traffic does not have the right-of-way over other road users at grade crossings and intersections. If the LRT traffic or buses are controlled by traffic control signals or LRT signal faces at an intersection with a roadway, the alignment is considered to be mixed-use even if some of the approaches to the intersection are used exclusively by LRT traffic or buses.</li></span>

      <li>Movable Bridge Resistance Gate—a type of traffic gate, which is located downstream of the movable bridge warning gate, that provides a physical deterrent to vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic when placed in the appropriate position.</li>

      <li>Movable Bridge Signal—a highway traffic signal installed at a movable bridge to notify traffic to stop during periods when the roadway is closed to allow the bridge to open.</li>

      <li>Movable Bridge Warning Gate—a type of traffic gate designed to warn, but not primarily to block, vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic when placed in the appropriate position.</li>

      <li>Multi-Lane—more than one lane moving in the same direction. A multi-lane street, highway, or roadway has a basic cross-section comprised of two or more through lanes in one or both directions. A multi-lane approach has two or more lanes moving toward the intersection, including turning lanes.</li>

      <li>Neutral Area—the paved area between the channelizing lines separating an entrance or exit ramp or a channelized turn lane or channelized entering lane from the adjacent through lane(s).</li>

      <li>Object Marker—a device used to mark obstructions within or adjacent to the roadway.</li>

      <li>Occupancy Requirement—any restriction that regulates the use of a facility or one or more lanes of a facility for any period of the day based on a specified number of persons in a vehicle.</li>

      <li>Occupant—a person driving or riding in a car, truck, bus, or other vehicle.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>On-Street Parking—parking within or along, and accessed directly from, a public roadway or a site roadway open to public travel.</li></span>

      <li>Open-Road ETC Lane—a non-attended lane that is designed to allow toll payments to be electronically collected from vehicles traveling at normal highway speeds. Open-Road ETC lanes are typically physically separated from the toll plaza, often following the alignment of the mainline lanes, with toll plaza lanes for cash toll payments being on a different alignment after diverging from the mainline lanes or a subset thereof.</li>

      <li>Open-Road Tolling—a system designed to allow electronic toll collection (ETC) from vehicles traveling at normal highway speeds. Open-Road Tolling might be used on toll roads or toll facilities in conjunction with toll plazas. Open-Road Tolling is also typically used on managed lanes and on toll facilities that only accept payment by ETC.</li>

      <li>Open-Road Tolling Point—the location along an Open-Road ETC lane at which roadside or overhead detection and receiving equipment are placed and vehicles are electronically assessed a toll.</li>

      <li>Opposing Traffic—vehicles that are traveling in the opposite direction. At an intersection, vehicles entering from an approach that is approximately straight ahead would be considered to be opposing traffic, but vehicles entering from approaches on the left or right would not be considered to be opposing traffic.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Option Lane—a lane that widens on the approach to, then splits into two lanes at, the theoretical gore of a decision point or bifurcation to allow traffic within the lane the option to continue on either route without changing lanes.</li></span>

      <li>Overhead Sign—a sign that is placed such that a portion or the entirety of the sign or its support is directly above the roadway or shoulder such that vehicles travel below it. Typical installations include signs placed on cantilever arms that extend over the roadway or shoulder, on sign support structures that span the entire width of the pavement, on mast arms or span wires <span class="text_added">either independently or </span>that also support traffic control signals, and on highway bridges that cross over the roadway.</li>

      <li>Parking Area—a parking lot or parking garage that is separated from a roadway. Parallel<span class="text_added">, perpendicular,</span> or angle parking spaces along a roadway are not considered a parking area.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Parking Space—an area marked or designated for storage of a vehicle while the driver is not present.</li></span>

      <li>Passive Grade Crossing—a grade crossing where none of the automatic traffic control devices associated with an Active Grade Crossing Warning System are present and at which the traffic control devices consist entirely of signs and/or markings.</li>

      <li>Pathway—a general term denoting a public way for purposes of travel by authorized users outside the traveled way and physically separated from the roadway by an open space or barrier and either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. Pathways include shared-use paths, but do not include sidewalks.</li>

      <li>Pathway Grade Crossing—the general area where a pathway and railroad or light rail transit tracks cross at the same level, within which are included the tracks, pathway, and traffic control devices for pathway traffic traversing that area.</li>

      <li>Paved—<span class="text_added">having a roadway surface that has both a structural (weight bearing) and a sealing purpose for the roadway, such as </span>a bituminous surface treatment, mixed bituminous concrete, or Portland cement concrete <span class="text_deleted">roadway surface that has both a structural (weight bearing) and a sealing purpose for the roadway</span>.</li>

      <li>Pedestrian—a person on foot, in a wheelchair, on skates, or on a skateboard.</li>

      <li>Pedestrian Change Interval—an interval during which the flashing UPRAISED HAND (symbolizing DONT WALK) signal indication is displayed.</li>

      <li>Pedestrian Clearance Time—the time provided for a pedestrian crossing in a crosswalk, after leaving the curb or <span class="text_deleted">shoulder</span><span class="text_added">edge of traveled way</span>, to travel to the far side of the traveled way or to a median.</li>

      <li>Pedestrian Facilit<span class="text_deleted">ies</span><span class="text_added">y</span>—a general term denoting <span class="text_added">a location where </span>improvements and provisions made to accommodate or encourage walking.</li>

      <li>Pedestrian Hybrid Beacon— a special type of hybrid beacon used to warn and control traffic at an unsignalized location to assist pedestrians in crossing a street or highway at a marked crosswalk.</li>

      <li>Pedestrian Signal Head—a signal head, which contains the symbols WALKING PERSON (symbolizing WALK) and UPRAISED HAND (symbolizing DONT WALK), that is installed to direct pedestrian traffic at a traffic control signal.</li>

      <li>Permissive Mode—a mode of traffic control signal operation in which left or right turns are permitted to be made after yielding to pedestrians, if any, and/or opposing traffic, if any. When a CIRCULAR GREEN signal indication is displayed, both left and right turns are permitted unless otherwise prohibited by another traffic control device. When a flashing YELLOW ARROW or flashing RED ARROW signal indication is displayed, the turn indicated by the arrow is permitted.</li>

      <li>Physical Gore—a longitudinal point where a physical barrier or the lack of a paved surface inhibits road users from crossing from a ramp or channelized turn lane or channelized entering lane to the adjacent through lane(s) or vice versa.</li>

      <li>Pictograph—a pictorial representation used to identify a governmental jurisdiction<span class="text_deleted">, an area of jurisdiction,</span> a governmental <span class="text_added">or other public transportation </span>agency, <span class="text_deleted">a military base or branch of service, a governmental-approved university or college,</span><span class="text_added">or</span> a toll payment system<span class="text_deleted">, or a government-approved institution</span>.</li>

      <li>Plaque—a traffic control device intended to communicate specific information to road users through a word, symbol, or arrow legend that is placed immediately adjacent to a sign to supplement the message on the sign. The difference between a plaque and a sign is that a plaque cannot be used alone. The designation for a plaque includes a “P” suffix.</li>

      <li>Platoon—a group of vehicles or pedestrians traveling together as a group, either voluntarily or involuntarily, because of traffic signal controls, geometrics, or other factors.</li>

      <li>Portable Traffic Control Signal—a temporary traffic control signal that is designed so that it can be easily transported and reused at different locations.</li>

      <li>Post-Mounted Sign—a sign that is placed to the side of the roadway such that no portion of the sign or its support is directly above the roadway or shoulder.</li>

      <li>Posted Speed Limit—a speed limit determined by law or regulation and displayed on Speed Limit signs.</li>

      <li>Preemption—the transfer of normal operation of a traffic control signal <span class="text_added">or a hybrid beacon </span>to a special control mode of operation.</li>

      <li>Preferential Lane—a highway lane <span class="text_added">or set of lanes, or a highway facility, </span>reserved for the exclusive use of one or more specific types of vehicles or vehicles with at least a specific number of occupants.</li>

      <li>Pre-signal—traffic control signal faces that <span class="text_added">are located upstream from a signalized intersection</span><span class="text_deleted">control traffic approaching a grade crossing</span> <span class="text_added">and are operated </span>in conjunction with the traffic control signal faces <span class="text_deleted">that control traffic approaching a highway-highway intersection beyond the tracks</span><span class="text_added">at the downstream signalized intersection in a manner that is designed to keep the area between the stop line for the upstream traffic control signal faces and the stop line for the downstream signalized intersection clear of queued vehicles</span>. Supplemental near-side traffic control signal faces for the <span class="text_deleted">highway-highway</span><span class="text_added">downstream signalized</span> intersection are not considered <span class="text_added">to be </span>pre-signals.<span class="text_deleted"> Pre-signals are typically used where the clear storage distance is insufficient to store one or more design vehicles.</span></li>

      <li>Pretimed Operation—a type of traffic control signal operation in which none of the signal phases function on the basis of actuation.</li>

      <li>Primary Signal Face—one of the required or recommended minimum number of signal faces for a given approach or separate turning movement, but not including near-side signal faces required as a result of the far-side signal faces exceeding the maximum distance from the stop line.</li>

      <li>Principal Legend—place names, street names, and route numbers placed on guide signs.</li>

      <li>Priority Control—a means by which the assignment of right-of-way is obtained or modified.</li>

      <li>Private Road<span class="text_deleted"> Open to Public Travel</span>—<span class="text_added">see Site Roadways Open to Public Travel</span><span class="text_deleted">private toll roads and roads (including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road) within shopping centers, airports, sports arenas, and other similar business and/or recreation facilities that are privately owned, but where the public is allowed to travel without access restrictions. Roads within private gated properties (except for gated toll roads) where access is restricted at all times, parking areas, driving aisles within parking areas, and private grade crossings shall not be included in this definition</span>.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Professional Engineer (P.E.)—An individual who has fulfilled education and experience requirements and passed examinations that, under State licensure laws, permit the individual to offer engineering services within areas of expertise directly to the public.</li></span>

      <li>Protected Mode—a mode of traffic control signal operation in which left or right turns are permitted to be made when a left or right GREEN ARROW signal indication is displayed.</li>

      <li>Public Road—any road, street, or similar facility under the jurisdiction of and maintained by a public agency and open to public travel.</li>

      <li>Pushbutton—a button to activate a device or signal timing for pedestrians, bicyclists, or other road users.</li>

      <li>Pushbutton Information Message—a recorded message that can be actuated by pressing a pushbutton when the walk interval is not timing and that provides the name of the street that the crosswalk associated with that particular pushbutton crosses and can also provide other information about the intersection signalization or geometry.</li>

      <li>Pushbutton Locator Tone—a repeating sound that informs approaching pedestrians that a pushbutton exists to actuate pedestrian timing or receive additional information and that enables pedestrians who have visual disabilities to locate the pushbutton.</li>

      <li>Queue Clearance Time—when used in <a href="part8_toc.html">Part 8</a>, the time required for the design vehicle of maximum length stopped just inside the minimum track clearance distance to start up and move through and clear the entire minimum track clearance distance.<span class="text_deleted"> If pre-signals are present, this time shall be long enough to allow the vehicle to move through the intersection, or to clear the tracks if there is sufficient clear storage distance. If a Four-Quadrant Gate system is present, this time shall be long enough to permit the exit gate arm to lower after the design vehicle is clear of the minimum track clearance distance.</span></li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Queue Cutter Signal—an independently-controlled traffic control signal (not operated in conjunction with the traffic control signal faces at a downstream signalized intersection) located at a grade crossing that controls traffic in one direction only on the roadway for the purpose of minimizing vehicular queuing across the tracks. The display of red signal indications is activated from a downstream queue detection system, by time of day, by approaching rail traffic, by an approaching bus on a busway, or by a combination of any of these methods.</li></span>

      <li>Quiet Zone—a segment of a rail line, with<span class="text_added">in which is situated</span> one or a number of consecutive public highway-rail grade crossings at which locomotive horns are not routinely sounded per 49 CFR Part 222.</li>

      <li>Rail Traffic—every device in, upon, or by which any person or property can be transported on rails or tracks and to which all other traffic must yield the right-of-way by law at grade crossings, including trains, one or more locomotives coupled (with or without cars), other railroad equipment, and light rail transit operating in exclusive or semi-exclusive alignments. Light rail transit operating in a mixed-use alignment, to which other traffic is not required to yield the right-of-way by law, is a vehicle and is not considered to be rail traffic.</li>

      <li>Raised Pavement Marker—a device mounted on or in a road surface that has a height generally not exceeding approximately 1 inch above the road surface for a permanent marker, or not exceeding approximately 2 inches above the road surface for a temporary flexible marker, and that is intended to be used as a positioning guide and/or to supplement or substitute for pavement markings.<span class="text_added"> Raised pavement markers might also be recessed into or flush with the pavement surface.</span></li>

      <li>Ramp Control Signal—a highway traffic signal installed to control the flow of traffic onto a freeway at an entrance ramp or at a freeway-to-freeway ramp connection.</li>

      <li>Ramp Meter—see Ramp Control Signal.</li>

      <li>Red Clearance Interval—an interval that follows a yellow change interval and precedes the next conflicting green interval.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Reconstructed—a term used to describe a roadway or a traffic control device. When used to describe a roadway, it describes a roadway that has been rebuilt or restored to its former use or that has been improved through a major renovation of its structural elements. When used to describe a traffic control device, it descibes a device that has been rebuilt or improved through major renovations of its structural or control elements.</li></span>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Rectangular Rapid-Flashing Beacon—a pedestrian-activated device comprising two hotizontally arranged, rapidly flashed, rectangular-shaped yellow indications that is used to provide supplemental emphasis for a pedestrian, school, or trail crossing warning sign at a marked crosswalk across an uncontrolled approach.</li></span>

      <li>Regulatory Sign—a sign that gives notice to road users of traffic laws or regulations.</li>

      <li>Retroreflectivity—a property of a surface that allows a large portion of the light coming from a point source to be returned directly back to a point near its origin.</li>

      <li>Right-of-Way [Assignment]—the permitting of vehicles and/or pedestrians to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to other vehicles or pedestrians by the display of a sign or signal indications.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Right-of-Way, Public Highway—the limits of real property, including the traveled way, shoulders, median, and the land alongside, that are owned by the public highway agency having jurisdiction. The land within these limits is dedicated to highway uses, including roadside areas such as rest areas, scenic overlooks, and weigh stations.</li></span>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>Right-of-Way Transfer Time—when used in <a href="part8_toc.html">Part 8</a>, the maximum amount of time needed for the worst case condition, prior to display of the track clearance green interval. This includes any railroad or light rail transit or highway traffic signal control equipment time to react to a preemption call, and any traffic control signal green, pedestrian walk and clearance, yellow change, and red clearance intervals for conflicting traffic.</li></span>

      <li>Road—see Roadway.</li>

      <li>Road User—a vehicle operator, bicyclist, or pedestrian, including persons with disabilities, within the highway or on a <span class="text_deleted">private road</span><span class="text_added">site roadway</span> open to public travel.</li>

      <li>Roadway—that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel and parking lanes, but exclusive of the sidewalk, berm, or shoulder even though such sidewalk, berm, or shoulder is used by persons riding bicycles or other human-powered vehicles. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term roadway as used in this Manual shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively.</li>

      <li>Roadway Network—a geographical arrangement of intersecting roadways.</li>

      <li>Roundabout—a circular intersection with yield control at entry, which permits a vehicle on the circulatory roadway to proceed, and with deflection of the approaching vehicle counter-clockwise around a central island.</li>

      <li>Rumble Strip—a series of intermittent, narrow, transverse areas of rough-textured, slightly raised, or depressed road surface that extend across the travel lane to alert road users to unusual traffic conditions or are located along the shoulder, along the roadway center line, or within islands formed by pavement markings to alert road users that they are leaving the travel lanes.</li>

      <li>Rural Highway—a type of roadway normally characterized by lower volumes, higher speeds, fewer turning conflicts, and less conflict with pedestrians.</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>Safe-Positioned—the positioning of emergency vehicles at an incident in a manner that attempts to protect both the responders performing their duties and road users traveling through the incident scene, while minimizing, to the extent practical, disruption of the adjacent traffic flow.</li></span><span class="note"> Relocated to Part 6.</span>

      <li>School—a public or private educational institution recognized by the state education authority for one or more grades K through 12 or as otherwise defined by the State.</li>

      <li>School Zone—a designated roadway segment approaching, adjacent to, and beyond school buildings or grounds, or along which school related activities occur.</li>

      <li>Semi-Actuated<span class="text_deleted"> Operation</span>—a type of traffic control signal operation in which at least one, but not all, signal phases function on the basis of actuation.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Semi-Exclusive Aligment—a light rail transit track(s) or a bus rapid transit busway that is in a separate right-of-way or that is along a street or railroad right-of-way where motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians have limited access and cross only at designated locations, such as at grade crossings where road users must yield the right-of-way to the light rail transit or the bus rapid transit traffic.</li></span>

      <li>Separate Turn Signal Face—a signal face that exclusively controls a turn movement and that displays signal indications that are applicable only to the turn movement.</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>Separation Time—the component of maximum highway traffic signal preemption time during which the minimum track clearance distance is clear of vehicular traffic prior to the arrival of rail traffic.</li></span>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Serviceable—the condition of a traffic control device in which it appears and operates as intended, until it requires replacement due to damage or wear. Wehther a device is serviceable will depend on the type of device under consideration. In general, if the device is capable of being serviced with minimal effort or replacement parts so that it continues to appear and operate as intended, and the device is otherwise substantially intact, then it can be considered to be in serviceable condition. If the device is damaged or not operational beyond reasonable repair, then it is likely no longer serviceable.</li></span>

      <li>Shared Roadway—a roadway that is officially designated and marked as a bicycle route, but which is open to motor vehicle travel and upon which no bicycle lane is designated.</li>

      <li>Shared Turn Signal Face—a signal face, for controlling both a turn movement and the adjacent through movement, that always displays the same color of circular signal indication that the adjacent through signal face or faces display.</li>

      <li>Shared-Use Path—a bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. Shared-use paths are also used by pedestrians (including skaters, users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and joggers) and other authorized motorized and non-motorized users.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Shoulder—a longitudinal area contiguous with the traveled way that is primarily for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses, and that is graded for emergency stopping. A shoulder might be paved or unpaved. A paved shoulder might be opened to part-time travel by some or all vehicles.</li></span>

      <li>Sidewalk—that portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property line or on easements of private property that is paved or improved and intended for use by pedestrians.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Sidewalk Grade Crossing—the portion of a highway-rail grade crossing or of a highway-light rail transit grade crossing where a sidewalk and railroad tracks or a sidewalk and light rail transit tracks cross at the same level, within which there are included the tracks, sidewalk, and traffic control devices for sidewalk users traversing that area.</li></span>

      <li>Sign—<span class="text_added">with regard to controlling traffic, </span>any traffic control device that is intended to communicate specific information to road users through a word, symbol, and/or arrow legend. Signs do not include highway traffic signals, pavement markings, delineators, or channelization devices.<span class="text_added"> Signs whose purpose is unrelated to traffic control are addressed in Section 1D.04</span></li>

      <li>Sign Assembly—a group of signs, located on the same support(s), that supplement one another in conveying information to road users.</li>

      <li>Sign Illumination—either internal or external lighting that shows similar color by day or night. Street or highway lighting shall not be considered as meeting this definition.</li>

      <li>Sign Legend—all word messages, logos, pictographs, and symbol and arrow designs that are intended to convey specific meanings. The border, if any, on a sign is not considered to be a part of the legend.</li>

      <li>Sign Panel—a separate panel or piece of material containing a word, <span class="text_added">logo, pictograph, </span>symbol, and/or arrow legend that is affixed to the face of a sign.</li>

      <li>Signal Backplate—a thin strip of material that extends outward from and parallel to a signal face on all sides of a signal housing to provide a background for improved visibility of the signal indications.</li>

      <li>Signal Coordination—the establishment of timed relationships between adjacent traffic control signals.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Signal Dimming—a reduction of the light output from a signal indication, hybrid beacon, or rectangular rapid-flashing beacon indication, typically for nighttime conditions, to a value that is below the minimum specified intensity for daytime conditions. If a variety of intensity levels are used during daytime conditions and all of the various levels (including the lowest of the intensities) are above the minimum specified intensity for daytime conditions, this would not be considered to be signal dimming.</li></span>

      <li>Signal Face—an assembly of one or more signal sections that is provided for controlling one or more traffic movements on a single approach.</li>

      <li>Signal Head—an assembly of one or more signal faces that is provided for controlling traffic movements on one or more approaches.</li>

      <li>Signal Housing—that part of a signal section that protects the light source and other required components.</li>

      <li>Signal Indication—the illumination of a signal lens or equivalent device.</li>

      <li>Signal Lens—that part of the signal section that redirects the light coming directly from the light source and its reflector, if any.</li>

      <li>Signal Louver—a device that can be mounted inside a signal visor to restrict visibility of a signal indication from the side or to limit the visibility of the signal indication to a certain lane or lanes, or to a certain distance from the stop line.</li>

      <li>Signal Phase—the right-of-way, yellow change, and red clearance intervals in a cycle that are assigned to an independent traffic movement or combination of movements.</li>

      <li>Signal Section—the assembly of a signal housing, signal lens, if any, and light source with necessary components to be used for displaying one signal indication.</li>

		<li><span class="text_deleted">Interval</span><span class="text_added">Signal</span> Sequence<span class="text_added"> (Sequence of Indications)</span>—the order of appearance of signal indications during successive intervals of a signal cycle.</li>


      <li>Signal System—two or more traffic control signals operating in signal coordination.</li>

      <li>Signal Timing—the amount of time allocated for the display of a signal indication.</li>

      <li>Signal Visor—that part of a signal section that directs the signal indication specifically to approaching traffic and reduces the effect of direct external light entering the signal lens.</li>

      <li>Signing—individual signs or a group of signs, not necessarily on the same support(s), that supplement one another in conveying information to road users.</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>Simultaneous Preemption—notification of approaching rail traffic is forwarded to the highway traffic signal controller unit or assembly and railroad or light rail transit active warning devices at the same time.</li></span>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Site Roadways Open to Public Travel—Roadways and bikeways on sites of shopping centers, office parks, airports, schools, universities, sports arenas, recreational parks, and other similar business, governmental, and/or recreation facilities that are publicly or privately owned but where the public is allowed to travel without full-time access restrictions. Two types of roadways are not included in this definition: (1) roadways where access is restricted at all times by gates and/or guards to residents, employees or other specifically authorized persons; and (2) private highway-rail grade crossings. Site roadways open to public travel do not include parking areas, including the driving aisles (see Definition 148) within those parking areas.</li></span>

      <li>Special Purpose Road—a low-volume, low-speed road that serves recreational areas or resource development activities.</li>

      <li>Speed—speed is defined based on the following classifications: 

      <ol type="a">
        <li>Average Speed—the summation of the instantaneous or spot-measured speeds at a specific location of vehicles divided by the number of vehicles observed.</li>

        <li>Design Speed—a selected speed used to determine the various geometric design features of a roadway.</li>

        <li>85th-Percentile Speed—the speed at or below which 85 percent of the motor vehicles travel.</li>

        <li>Operating Speed—a speed at which a typical vehicle or the overall traffic operates. Operating speed might be defined with speed values such as the average, pace, or 85th-percentile speeds.</li>

        <li>Pace—the 10 mph speed range representing the speeds of the largest percentage of vehicles in the traffic stream.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Speed Limit—the maximum (or minimum) speed applicable to a section of highway as established by law or regulation.</li>

      <li>Speed Limit Sign Beacon—a beacon used to supplement a SPEED LIMIT sign.</li>

      <li>Speed Measurement Markings—a white transverse pavement marking placed on the roadway to assist the enforcement of speed regulations.</li>

      <li>Speed Zone—a section of highway with a speed limit that is established by law or regulation, but which might be different from a legislatively specified statutory speed limit.</li>

      <li>Splitter Island—a median island used to separate opposing directions of traffic entering and exiting a roundabout.</li>

      <li>Station Crossing—a pathway grade crossing that is associated with a station platform.</li>

      <li>Statutory Speed Limit—a speed limit established by legislative action <span class="text_added">(e.g., Federal or State law) </span>that typically is applicable for a particular class of highways with specified design, functional, jurisdictional and/or location characteristics and that is not necessarily displayed on Speed Limit signs.</li>

      <li>Steady (Steady Mode)—the continuous display of a signal indication for the duration of an interval, signal phase, or consecutive signal phases.</li>

      <li>Stop Beacon—a beacon used to supplement a STOP sign, a DO NOT ENTER sign, or a WRONG WAY sign.</li>

      <li>Stop Line—a solid white pavement marking line extending across approach lanes to indicate the point at which a stop is intended or required to be made.</li>

      <li>Street—see Highway.</li>

      <li>Supplemental Signal Face—a signal face that is not a primary signal face but which is provided for a given approach or separate turning movement to enhance visibility or conspicuity.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Swing Gate—a self-closing fence-type gate designated to swing open away from the track area and return to the closed position upon release.</li></span>

      <li>Symbol—the approved design of a pictorial <span class="text_added">or graphical </span>representation of a specific traffic control message for signs, pavement markings, traffic control signals, or other traffic control devices, as shown in the MUTCD.</li>

      <li>Temporary Traffic Control Signal—a traffic control signal that is installed for a limited time period.</li>

      <li>Temporary Traffic Control Zone—an area of a highway where road user conditions are changed because of a work zone or incident by the use of temporary traffic control devices, flaggers, uniformed law enforcement officers, or other authorized personnel.</li>

      <li>Theoretical Gore—a longitudinal point at the upstream end of a neutral area at an exit ramp or channelized turn lane where the channelizing lines that separate the ramp or channelized turn lane from the adjacent through lane(s) begin to diverge, or a longitudinal point at the downstream end of a neutral area at an entrance ramp or channelized entering lane where the channelizing lines that separate the ramp or channelized entering lane from the adjacent through lane(s) intersect each other.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Through Train—a train movement that continues without stopping or reversing direction throughout the entire length of the rail traffic detection circuit length approaching a highway-rail grade crossing.</li></span>

      <li>Timed Exit Gate Operating Mode—a mode of operation where the exit gate descent at a grade crossing is based on a predetermined time interval.</li>

      <li>Toll Booth—a shelter where a toll attendant is stationed to collect tolls or issue toll tickets. A toll booth is located adjacent to a toll lane and is typically set on a toll island.</li>

      <li>Toll Island—a raised island on which a toll booth or other toll collection and related equipment are located.</li>

      <li>Toll Lane—an individual lane located within a toll plaza in which a toll payment is collected or, for toll-ticket systems, a toll ticket is issued.</li>

      <li>Toll Plaza—the location at which tolls are collected consisting of a grouping of toll booths, toll islands, toll lanes, and, typically, a canopy. Toll plazas might be located on highway mainlines or on interchange ramps. A mainline toll plaza is sometimes referred to as a barrier toll plaza because it interrupts the traffic flow.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Toll Road (facility)—a road or facility that is open to traffic only by payment of a user toll or fee.</li></span>

      <li>Toll-Ticket System—a system in which the user of a toll road receives a ticket from a machine or toll booth attendant upon entering a toll system. The ticket denotes the user’s point of entry and, upon exiting the toll system, the user surrenders the ticket and is charged a toll based on the distance traveled between the points of entry and exit.</li>

      <li>Traffic—pedestrians, bicyclists, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and other conveyances either singularly or together while using for purposes of travel any highway or <span class="text_deleted">private road</span><span class="text_added">site roadway</span> open to public travel.</li>

      <li>Traffic Control Device—a<span class="text_added">ll</span> sign<span class="text_added">s</span>, signal<span class="text_added">s</span>, marking<span class="text_added">s</span>, <span class="text_added">channelization devices, </span>or other device<span class="text_added">s</span> <span class="text_added">that use colors, shapes, symbols, words, sounds, and/or tactile information for the primary purpose of communicating</span><span class="text_deleted">used to</span> regulat<span class="text_deleted">e</span><span class="text_added">ory</span>, warn<span class="text_added">ing</span>, or guid<span class="text_deleted">e</span><span class="text_added">ance messages to road users on</span> <span class="text_deleted">traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to </span>a street, highway, <span class="text_deleted">private road open to public travel, </span>pedestrian facility, <span class="text_added">bikeway, pathway, </span>or <span class="text_added">site roadway open to public travel</span><span class="text_deleted">shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction</span>.<span class="text_added"> Infrastructure elements that restrict the road user's travel paths or vehicle speeds, such as curbs, speed humps, and other raised roadway surfaces, are not traffic control devices. Transverse or longitudinal rumble strips are also not traffic control devices. Operational devices associated with the application of traffic control strategies such as in-vehicle electronics, fencing, roadway lighting, barriers, and attenuators are shown in the Manual for context but their design, application, and usage are not specified since they are not traffic control devices.</span></li>

      <li>Traffic Control Signal (Traffic Signal)—any highway traffic signal by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.<span class="text_added"> These devices do not include pedestrian hybrid beacons (see Chapter 4J) or emergency-vehicle hybrid beacons (see Chapter 4N).</span></li>

      <li>Train—one or more locomotives coupled, with or without cars, that operates on rails or tracks and to which all other traffic must yield the right-of-way by law at highway-rail grade crossings.</li>

      <li>Transverse Markings—pavement markings that are generally placed perpendicular and across the flow of traffic such as shoulder markings; word, symbol, and arrow markings; stop lines; crosswalk lines; speed measurement markings; parking space markings; and others.</li>

      <li>Traveled Way—the portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles, exclusive of the shoulders, berms, sidewalks, and parking lanes.</li>

      <li>Turn Bay—a lane for the exclusive use of turning vehicles that is formed on the approach to the location where the turn is to be made. In most cases where turn bays are provided, drivers who desire to turn must move out of a through lane into the newly formed turn bay in order to turn. A through lane that becomes a turn lane is considered to be a dropped lane rather than a turn bay.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Uncontrolled approach—an approach on which vehicles are not controlled by a traffic control signal, hybrid beacon, STOP sign, or YIELD sign.</li></span>

      <li>Upstream—a term that refers to a location that is encountered by traffic prior to a downstream location as it flows in an “upstream to downstream” direction. For example, “the upstream end of a lane line separating the turn lane from a through lane on the approach to an intersection” is the end of the line that is furthest from the intersection.</li>

      <li>Urban Street—a type of street normally characterized by relatively low speeds, wide ranges of traffic volumes, narrower lanes, frequent intersections and driveways, significant pedestrian traffic, and more businesses and houses.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Variable Message Sign—see Changeable Message Sign.</li></span>

      <li>Vehicle—every device in, upon, or by which any person or property can be transported or drawn upon a highway, except trains and light rail transit operating in exclusive or semi-exclusive alignments. Light rail transit equipment operating in a mixed-use alignment, to which other traffic is not required to yield the right-of-way by law, is a vehicle.</li>

      <li>Vibrotactile Pedestrian Device—an accessible pedestrian signal feature that communicates, by touch, information about pedestrian timing using a vibrating surface.</li>

      <li>Visibility-Limited Signal Face or Visibility-Limited Signal Section—a type of signal face or signal section designed (or shielded, hooded, or louvered) to restrict the visibility of a signal indication from the side, to a certain lane or lanes, or to a certain distance from the stop line.</li>

      <li>Walk Interval—an interval during which the WALKING PERSON (symbolizing WALK) signal indication is displayed.</li>

      <li>Warning Beacon—a beacon used only to supplement an appropriate warning or regulatory sign or marker.</li>

      <li>Warning Light—a portable, powered, yellow, lens-directed, enclosed light that is used in a temporary traffic control zone in either a steady burn or a flashing mode.</li>

      <li>Warning Sign—a sign that gives notice to road users of a situation that might not be readily apparent.</li>

      <li>Warrant—a warrant describes a threshold condition based upon average or normal conditions that, if found to be satisfied as part of an engineering study, shall result in analysis of other traffic conditions or factors to determine whether a traffic control device or other improvement is justified. Warrants are not a substitute for engineering judgment. The fact that a warrant for a particular traffic control device is met is not conclusive justification for the installation of the device.</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>Wayside Equipment—the signals, switches, and/or control devices for railroad or light rail transit operations housed within one or more enclosures located along the railroad or light rail transit right-of-way and/or on railroad or light rail transit property.</li></span>

      <li>Wayside Horn System—a stationary horn (or series of horns) located at a grade crossing that is used in conjunction with train-activated or light rail transit-activated warning systems to provide audible warning of approaching rail traffic to road users on the highway or pathway approaches to a grade crossing, either as a supplement or alternative to the sounding of a locomotive horn.</li>

      <li>Worker—a person on foot whose duties place him or her within the right-of-way of a street, highway, or pathway, such as<span class="text_added">:</span> <span class="text_deleted">street, highway, or pathway </span>construction and maintenance forces<span class="text_deleted">,</span><span class="text_added">;</span> survey crews<span class="text_deleted">,</span><span class="text_added">;</span> utility crews, responders to incidents within the <span class="text_deleted">street, highway, or pathway </span>right-of-way<span class="text_deleted">,</span><span class="text_added">;</span> and law enforcement personnel when directing traffic, investigating crashes, and handling lane closures, obstructed roadways, and disasters within the right-of-way<span class="text_deleted"> of a street, highway, or pathway</span>.</li>

      <li>Wrong-Way Arrow—a slender, elongated, white pavement marking arrow placed upstream from the ramp terminus to indicate the correct direction of traffic flow. Wrong-way arrows are intended primarily to warn wrong-way road users that they are going in the wrong direction.</li>

      <li>Yellow Change Interval—the first interval following the green or flashing arrow interval during which the steady yellow signal indication is displayed.</li>

      <li>Yield Line—a row of solid white isosceles triangles pointing toward approaching vehicles extending across approach lanes to indicate the point at which the yield is intended or required to be made.</li>
    </ol>

	<h3 id="section1C03">Section 1C.03 Meanings of Acronyms and Abbreviations <span class="text_added">Used </span>in this Manual</h3>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1C03_para01">01</span><span class="standard">The following acronyms and abbreviations, when used in this Manual, shall have the following meanings:</span></p>

    <ol class="standard">
      <li>AADT—annual average daily traffic</li>

      <li>AASHTO—American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials</li>

      <li>ADA—Americans with Disabilities Act</li>

      <li>ADAAG—Americans with Disabilities Accessibility Guidelines</li>

      <li>ADT—average daily traffic</li>

      <li>AFAD—Automated Flagger Assistance Device</li>

      <li>ANSI—American National Standards Institute</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>cd/lx/m2—candelas per lux per square meter</li></span>

      <li>CFR—Code of Federal Regulations</li>

      <li>CMS—changeable message sign</li>

      <li>dBA—A-weighted decibels</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>EPA—Environmental Protection Agency</li></span>

      <li>ETC—electronic toll collection</li>

      <li>EV—electric vehicle</li>

      <li>FHWA—Federal Highway Administration</li>

      <li>FRA—Federal Railroad Administration</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>ft—foot or feet</li></span>

      <li>FTA—Federal Transit Administration</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>HOT—high occupancy tolls</li></span>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>HOTM—FHWA’s Office of Transportation Management</li></span>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>HOTO—FHWA’s Office of Transportation Operations</li></span>

      <li>HOV—high-occupancy vehicle</li>

      <li>ILEV—inherently low<span class="text_deleted"> </span><span class="text_added">-</span>emission vehicle</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>in—inch(es)</li></span>

      <li>ISEA—International Safety Equipment Association</li>

      <li>ITE—Institute of Transportation Engineers</li>

      <li>ITS—intelligent transportation systems</li>

      <li>LED—light<span class="text_deleted"> </span><span class="text_added">-</span>emitting diode</li>

      <li>LP—liquid petroleum</li>

      <li>LRT—light rail transit</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>mi—mile(s)</li></span>

      <li>MPH or mph—miles per hour</li>

      <li>MUTCD—Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices<span class="text_added"> for Streets and Highways</span></li>

      <li>NCHRP—National Cooperative Highway Research Program</li>

      <li>ORT—open-road tolling</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>PCMS—portable changeable message sign</li></span>

      <li>PRT—perception-response time</li>

      <li>RPM—raised pavement marker</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>RRPM—raised retroreflective pavement marker</li></span>

      <li>RV—recreational vehicle</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><li>TDD—telecommunication devices for the deaf</li></span>

      <li>TRB—Transportation Research Board</li>

      <li>TTC—temporary traffic control</li>

      <li>U.S.—United States</li>

      <li>U.S.C.—United States Code</li>

      <li>USDOT—United States Department of Transportation</li>

      <li>UVC—Uniform Vehicle Code</li>

      <li>VPH or vph—vehicles per hour</li>
    </ol>

    
  </div>
</body>
</html>