<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 5B - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content" class="text_added">
    <h1>Chapter 5B. Provisions for Traffic Control Devices</h1>

    <h3 id="section5B01">Section 5B.01 Signs</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B01_para01">01</span><span class="support">DAS uses machine vision technology to locate, read, and comprehend traffic signs and appropriately make vehicle operational decisions. Location, condition, uniformity, design characteristics, and consistent application all affect the ability of machine vision to perform these functions.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B01_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Sign location and application should be clearly associated with the displayed message to the specific lane or road to which it applies, such as in the case of parallel roads or lanes with different speed limits or restrictions.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B01_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The practice of sign and information spreading (see <a href ="part2a.xhtml#section2A19">Section 2A.19</a>) should be used to limit the 12 amount of information displayed in one location or on one sign to minimize sign clutter.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B01_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Signs with designs that are otherwise not provided for in this Manual or the Standard Highway Signs publication should use standardized sign design practices and features as provided for in this Manual for the type of sign, the location, and character of the roadway on which it is used.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B01_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">The illuminated portion of electronic-display signs using LEDs should have a standard refresh/flicker rate. The refresh rate of the LEDs should be greater than 200 Hz to be easier for the camera to detect.</span></p>


    <h3 id="section5B02">Section 5B.02 Markings</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B02_para01">01</span><span class="support">DAS uses machine vision technology to locate, read and comprehend pavement markings. Location, condition, uniformity, design characteristics, and consistent application all have some effect on the ability of machine vision to perform this function. Certain pavement marking applications and practices have been shown through research to better support AV operations, while also benefiting, or at least not detracting from, the performance of the human operator. Such practices include the following:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="support">
	<li>Normal-width longitudinal lines on freeways, expressways, and ramps of at least 6 inches wide (see <a href ="part3a.xhtml#section3A04">Section 3A.04</a>).</li>
	<li>Edge lines of at least 6 inches in width on roadways with posted speeds greater than 40 mph (see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B09">Section 3B.09</a>).</li>
	</ol>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">The following should be considered to better accommodate machine vision used to support the automation of vehicles:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
	<li>Normal-width longitudinal lines of at least 6 inches wide on conventional roadways.</li>
	<li>Edge lines of at least 6 inches in width on conventional roadways with posted speeds of 40 mph or less.</li>
	<li>Dotted edge line extensions along all entrance and exit ramps, all auxiliary lanes, and all tapers where a deceleration or auxiliary lane is added (see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B11">Section 3B.11</a>).</li>
	<li>Chevron markings (see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B25">Section 3B.25</a>) in the neutral areas of exit gores to distinguish them from travel lanes.</li>
	<li>Continuous markings at the beginning of work zones and in all lane transitions.</li>
	<li>Raised pavement markers only as a supplement to, rather than as a substitute for, markings (see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B16">Sections 3B.16</a> and <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B17">3B.17</a>).</li>
	<li>Uniform contrast markings on light-colored pavements to create greater contrast.</li>
	<li>Broken lines (see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B06">Section 3B.06</a>) of at least 10 ft in length with a maximum gap of 30 ft.</li>
	<li>Avoidance of decorative elements in crosswalks.</li>
	</ol>

    <h3 id="section5B03">Section 5B.03 Highway Traffic Signals</h3>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B03_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">The following considerations should be used to better accommodate machine vision used to support the automation of vehicles and benefit the performance of the human vehicle operator:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
	<li>Traffic signal design should be consistent along corridors with respect to the placement of signal faces overhead on span-wire and mast arms versus post-mounting on the side of the roadway.</li>
	<li>The number of signal faces for approach lanes and the selection of signal indications and signal clusters should be consistent along a corridor to promote uniform displays for identical or similar situations.</li>
	<li>The refresh rate of the LED traffic signals should be consistent throughout the jurisdiction and be greater than 200 Hz to allow greater consistency in machine vision detection.</li>
	</ol>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B03_para02">02</span><span class="support">Achieving uniformity along a corridor is desirable for machine vision technology, but can be challenging. Multiple options are available for traffic signal displays to allow design variations based on specific intersection variables such as available overhead clearance, utility conflicts, signal support design constraints and other factors. Where possible, connected and automated vehicles (CAV) needs with respect to traffic signals are better addressed through vehicle to infrastructure (V2I) for the reasons stated above and for reliability and accuracy of critical communications under all environmental conditions.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section5B04">Section 5B.04 Temporary Traffic Control</h3>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Considerations should be given to better accommodate machine vision used to support the automation of vehicles and benefit the performance of the human vehicle operator in and through work zones.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">The type of signs, spacing and mounting height should follow the requirements of <a href ="part6b.xhtml#section6B04">Section 6B.04</a> Advance Warning Area and 6F.02 Sign Placement. The END ROAD WORK (G20-2) sign should be used to establish the end of the work zone.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Existing pavement markings shall be maintained in all long-term stationary (see <a href ="part6g.xhtml#section6G02">Section 6G.02</a>) temporary traffic control zones in accordance with <a href ="part3a.xhtml">Chapters 3A</a> and <a href ="part3b.xhtml">3B</a>, except as otherwise provided for temporary pavement markings in <a href ="part6f.xhtml#section6F78">Section 6F.78</a>. Pavement markings shall match the alignment of the markings in place at both ends of the TTC zone. Pavement markings shall be placed along the entire length of any paved detour or temporary roadway prior to the detour or roadway being opened to road users.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para04">04</span><span class="standard">For long-term stationary operations, pavement markings in the temporary traveled way that are no longer applicable shall be removed or obliterated as soon as practical. Pavement marking obliteration shall remove the non-applicable pavement marking material, and the obliteration method shall minimize pavement scarring. Painting over existing pavement markings with black paint or spraying with asphalt shall not be accepted as a substitute for removal or obliteration.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">To better accommodate machine vision used to support the automation of vehicles, channelizing devices should be at least 8 inches wide with retroreflective material for reliable machine detection in all weather conditions. Markings entering the work zone and through lane shifts should be made with highly visible and continuous materials, not intermittent buttons and reflectors.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section5B05">Section 5B.05 Traffic Control for Railroad and Light Rail Transit Grade Crossings</h3>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B05_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">For passive and active grade crossings, placement of signs and markings should be consistent along a corridor to promote uniformity and to improve the ability of machine vision technology to recognize highway-rail grade crossings.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B05_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">For active grade crossings, V2I communication should be used to relay information on the arrival or presence of a train at a highway-rail grade crossing.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B05_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">To better accommodate machine vision used to support the automation of vehicles, the signs and pavement markings associated with railroad crossings and tracks that are no longer active should be removed.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B05_para04">04</span><span class="support">Where possible, CAV needs with respect to highway-rail grade crossings are better addressed through V2I infrastructure for reasons of reliability and accuracy of critical communications under all environmental conditions.</span></p>

    	<h3 id="section5B06">Section 5B.06 Traffic Control for Bicycle Facilities</h3>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B06_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">To better accommodate machine vision used to support the automation of vehicles, bicycle facilities should be segregated from other vehicle traffic using physical barriers where practicable.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B06_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Road markings should indicate the end of a bike lane that is merged with other traffic.</span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>