<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 1A - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 1A. General</h1>

    <h3><span class="text_added" id="section1A01">Section 1A.01 Purpose of the MUTCD</span></h3>

    <span class="text_added"> 

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A01_para01">01</span><span class="support">The purpose of the MUTCD is to establish national criteria for the use of traffic control devices that meet the needs and expectancy of road users on all streets, highways, bikeways, and site roadways open to public travel. This purpose is achieved through the following objectives:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Promote national uniformity in the meaning and appearance of traffic control devices.</li>

      <li>Promote national consistency in the use, installation, and operation of traffic control devices.</li>

      <li>Provide basic principles for traffic engineers to use in making decisions regarding the use, installation, operation, maintenance, and removal of traffic control devices.</li>

      <li>Promote safety and efficiency through appropriate use of traffic control devices.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A01_para02">02</span><span class="support">Applicability of the MUTCD to facilities open to public travel is independent of the type of ownership or jurisdiction (public or private) and the source of funding (Federal, State, local, or private).</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A01_para03">03</span><span class="support">This Manual presumes sufficient working knowledge, professional training and experience, and education in the principles of engineering. Other resources can be consulted to understand the basis for decision that are made in which engineering study or judgment will be applied.</span></p>

    </span> 

    <h3 id="section1A02">Section 1A.0<span class="text_deleted">1</span><span class="text_added">2</span> <span class="text_deleted">Purpose of </span>Traffic Control Devices<span class="text_added"> - Definition</span></h3>

    

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="support">Traffic control devices notify road users of regulations and provide warning and guidance needed for the uniform and efficient operation of all elements of the traffic stream in a manner intended to minimize the occurrences of crashes.</span></span><span class="note">This paragraph deleted since it is redundant with the definition provided in Section 1C.02</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A02_para01">01</span> <span class="support"><span class="text_added">As defined in Section 1C.02, </span><span class="text_deleted">T</span><span class="text_added">t</span>raffic control devices <span class="text_deleted">shall be defined</span><span class="text_added">include</span> as all signs, signals, markings, <span class="text_added">channelizing devices, </span><span class="text_deleted">and</span><span class="text_added">or</span> other devices <span class="text_added">that use color, shapes, symbols, words, sounds, and/or tactile information for the primary purpose of communcating a </span><span class="text_deleted">used to</span> regulat<span class="text_deleted">e</span><span class="text_added">ory</span>, warn<span class="text_added">ing</span>, or guid<span class="text_added">ance message to road users on</span><span class="text_deleted">e traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to</span> a street, highway, pedestrian facility, bikeway, <span class="text_added">pathway</span>or <span class="text_deleted">private road</span><span class="text_added">site roadway</span>open to public travel<span class="text_deleted"> (see definition in Section 1A.13) by authority of a public agency or official having jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road, by authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction</span>.</span><span class="note">This paragraph moved from the existing Introduction</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A02_para02">02</span><span class="support">Certain types of signs and other devices that do not have any traffic control purpose are sometimes placed within the highway right-of-way by or with the permission of the public agency or the official having jurisdiction over the street or highway. <span class="text_deleted">Most of these signs and other devices are not intended for use by road users in general, and their message is only important to individuals who have been instructed in their meanings. </span>These signs and other devices are not considered to be traffic control devices and provisions regarding their design and use are not included in this Manual. Among these signs and other devices are the following:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Devices whose purpose is to assist highway maintenance personnel. Examples include markers to guide snowplow operators, devices that identify culvert and drop inlet locations, and devices that precisely identify highway locations for maintenance or mowing purposes.</li>

      <li>Devices whose purpose is to assist fire or law enforcement personnel. Examples include markers that identify fire hydrant locations, signs that identify fire or water district boundaries, speed measurement pavement markings, small indicator lights to assist in enforcement of red light violations, and photo enforcement systems.</li>

      <li>Devices whose purpose is to assist utility company personnel and highway contractors, such as markers that identify underground utility locations.</li>

      <li>Signs posting local non-traffic ordinances.</li>

      <li>Signs giving civic organization meeting information.</li>

      <span class="text_added">

      <li>Messages displayed on changeable message signs for America's Missing: Broadcast Emergency Repsonse (AMBER) alerts and homeland security information during declared states of emergency (see Section 2L of this Manual for specific provisions and limitations).</li>

      </span>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="note">This paragraph moved from existing Section 1A.08, except for the second sentence, which has been deleted as it is unnecessary</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="paranum" id="section1A02_para03">03</span><span class="support">Infrastructure elements that restrict the road user's travel paths or vehicle speeds, such as curbs, speed bumps or humps, and other raised roadway surfaces, are not traffic control devices. Certain operational devices associated with the application of traffic control strategies, such as in-vehicle electronics, fencing, roadway lighting, barriers, and attenuators are shown in this Manual for context but their design, application, and usage are not specified since they ar enot traffic control devices.</span></span></p>

    
    <h3 id="section1A03"><span class="text_added">Section 1A.03 Target Road Users</span></h3>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A03_para01">01</span><span class="support">There are two groups of target road users for traffic control devices:</span></span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support text_added">
      <li>Operators of vehicles, including bicyclists -- This target user is a reasonable and prudent individual who is alert and attentive, has demonstrated a basic proficiency in operating a vehicle on a specific facility, has demonstrated a basic understanding of traffic control devices and traffic laws, and is operating in a lawful manner that is appropriate for the facility and conditions, while demonstrating due care for the current conditions on the roadway.</li>

      <li>Pedestrians -- This target user is an alert and attentive individual who is functioning in a lawful manner that is appropriate for the facility and conditions, while demonstrating due care for the current conditions of the roadway. Pedestrians with disabilities might be blind or vision-impaired, have mobility limitations, or other impairments.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="paranum" id="section1A03_para02">02</span><span class="support ">Because of the connectivity of the transportation network, familiarity of the target road users with a particular location cannot be presumed for the purpose of selecting and installing traffic control devices.</span></span></p>

    <h3 id="section1A04"><span class="text_added">Section 1A.04 Use of the MUTCD</span></h3>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Traffic control device principles in the MUTCD shall be developed for and used by individuals who are duly authorized and qualified to conduct traffic control device activities.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Where MUTCD content requires a decision for implementation, such decisions shall be made by individuals who have the appropriate level of experience and expertise to make traffic control device decisions.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para03">03</span><span class="support">See Section 1C.02 for definitions of "engineering study" and "engineering judgment."</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">In making traffic control device decisions, individuals should consider the impacts of the decision on the following: safety and operational efficiency (mobility) of road user at that location; the effective utilization of agency resources; cost-effectiveness; and enforcement and education aspects of traffic control devices.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para05">05</span><span class="support">Throughout this Manual the headings Standard, Guidance, Option, and Support<span class="text_added">, the meanings of which are defined in Section 1C.01,</span> are used to classify the nature of the text that follows. Figures and tables, including the notes contained therein, supplement the text and might constitute a Standard, Guidance, Option, or Support. The user needs to refer to the appropriate text to classify the nature of the figure, table, or note contained therein.</span><span class="note">This paragraph moved from the existing Introduction</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Except when a specific numeral is required or recommended by the text of a Section of this Manual, numerals displayed on the images of devices in the figures that specify quantities such as times, distances, speed limits, and weights should be regarded as examples only. When installing any of these devices, the numerals should be appropriately altered to fit the specific situation.</span><span class="note">This paragraph moved from the existing Introduction</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">Similarly, destination names, route numbers, and State route shields that are displayed on the images of devices in the figures should be regarded as examples only. When installing any of these devices, the destination names, route numbers, and State route shields should be appropriately altered to fit the specific situation.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><span class="note">The following Support paragraphs moved from the existing Introduction</span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para08">08</span><span class="support">The following information will be useful when reference is being made to a specific portion of text in this Manual.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para09">09</span><span class="support">There are nine Parts in this Manual and each Part <span class="text_deleted">is comprised of</span><span class="text_added">comprises</span>one or more Chapters. Each Chapter is comprised of one or more Sections. Parts are given a <span class="text_added">single-digit </span>numerical identification, such as Part 2 – Signs. Chapters are identified by the Part number and a letter, such as Chapter 2B – Regulatory Signs<span class="text_deleted">, Barricades, and Gates</span>. Sections are identified by the Chapter number and letter followed by a decimal point and a <span class="text_added">2-digit </span>number, such as Section 2B.03 – Size of Regulatory Signs.<span class="text_added"> In some Chapters the Sections are grouped together by subject into un-numbered sub-chapters with a heading, such as "Signing for Right-of-Way at Intersections" (Sections 2B.06 through 2B.22).</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para10">10</span><span class="support">Each Section <span class="text_deleted">is comprised of</span><span class="text_added">comprises</span> one or more paragraphs. The paragraphs are indented and are identified by a number. Paragraphs are counted from the beginning of each Section without regard to the intervening text headings (Standard, Guidance, Option, or Support)<span class="text_added"> or any intervening text in embedded Figures or Tables</span>. Some paragraphs have lettered or numbered items. As an example of how to cite this Manual, the phrase “Not less than 40 feet beyond the stop line” that appears in Section 4D.<span class="text_deleted">14</span><span class="text_added">07</span>of this Manual would be referenced in writing as “Section 4D.<span class="text_deleted">14</span><span class="text_added">07</span>, P<span class="text_added">ar.</span>1, A.1,” and would be verbally referenced as “Item A.1 of Paragraph 1 of Section 4D.<span class="text_deleted">14</span><span class="text_added">07</span>.”</span></p>

    <h3 id="section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_deleted">11</span><span class="text_added">05</span> Relation to Other Publications</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A05_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">To the extent that they are incorporated by specific reference, the latest editions of the following publications, or those editions specifically noted, shall be a part of this Manual: “Standard Highway Signs<span class="text_deleted"> and Markings</span>” <span class="text_deleted">book</span><span class="text_added">publication</span>(FHWA); and “Color Specifications for Retroreflective Sign and Pavement Marking Materials” (appendix to subpart F of Part 655 of Title 23 of the Code of Federal Regulations).</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A05_para02">02</span> <span class="support">The “Standard Highway Signs<span class="text_deleted"> and Markings</span>” <span class="text_deleted">book</span><span class="text_added">publication</span> includes standard alphabets and symbols and arrows for signs and pavement markings.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted">

    <p><span class="support">For information about the publications mentioned in <a href="#section1A05_para01">Paragraph 1</a>, visit the Federal Highway Administration’s MUTCD website at <a href="http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov">http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov</a>, or write to the FHWA, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE, HOTO, Washington, DC 20590.</span></p>

    </span> 

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A05_para03">03</span> <span class="support">Other publications that <span class="text_deleted">are</span><span class="text_added">are not regulatory in nature, and are not independently legally enforceable, but might be</span>useful sources of information <span class="text_deleted">with respect to the use of this Manual are listed in this paragraph. See <a href="../intro/addresses.html">Addresses</a> in this Manual for ordering information for the following publications (later editions might also be available as useful sources of information)</span><span class="text_added">include</span>:</span><span class="note">The following list has been reorgniazed by title</span></p>

    <ol class="support">
      <li>“AAA School Safety Patrol Operations Manual,” 2006 Edition (American Automobile Association—AAA)</li>

      <li>“Accessible Pedestrian Signals—A Guide to Best Practices (NCHRP Web-Only Document 117A),” 2008 Edition (Transportation Research Board—TRB)</li>

      <li>“American National Standard for High-Visibility Public Safety Vests,” (ANSI/ISEA 207-<span class="text_deleted">2006</span><span class="text_added">2011</span>), <span class="text_deleted">2006</span><span class="text_added">2011</span> Edition (International Safety Equipment Association—ISEA)</li>

      <li>“American National Standard for High-Visibility Safety Apparel and Headwear,” (ANSI/ISEA 107-<span class="text_deleted">2004</span><span class="text_added">2010</span>), <span class="text_deleted">2004</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Edition (ISEA)</li>

      <li>“A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets,” <span class="text_deleted">2004</span><span class="text_added">2011</span> Edition (American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials—AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Changeable Message Sign Operation and Messaging Handbook (FHWA-OP-03-070),” 2004 Edition (Federal Highway Administration—FHWA)</li>

      <li>“Designing Sidewalks and Trails for Access—Part 2—Best Practices Design Guide (FHWA-EP-01-027),” 2001 Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <span class="text_added">

      <li>"Equipment and Materials Standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers," 1988 Edition (available at http://www.ite.org/standards/led/signals.asp); which includes "Chapter 1--Traffic Signal Lamps," 1980 Edition; "Chapter 2--Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads," 1985 Edition; "Chapter 3--Pedestrian Traffic Control Indications," 1985 Edition; and "Chapter 13--Purchase Specification for Flashing and Steady Burn Warning Lights," 2001 Edition (ITE)</li>

      </span>

      <li>“Federal-Aid Highway Program Guidance on High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) Lanes,” <span class="text_deleted">2001</span><span class="text_added">2012</span> (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities,” <span class="text_deleted">1999</span><span class="text_added">2012</span> Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Guide for the Planning, Design, and Operation of Pedestrian Facilities,” 2004 Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Guide to Metric Conversion,” 1993 Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Guidelines for Accessible Pedestrian Signals (NCHRP Web-Only Document 117B),” 2008 Edition (TRB)</li>

      <span class="text_added">

      <li>"Guidelines for Determining Traffic Signal Change and Clearance Intervals: A Recommended Practice of Institute of Transportation Engineers," 2020 (Institute of Transportation Engineers--ITE)</li>

      </span>

      <li>“Guidelines for the Selection of Supplemental Guide Signs for Traffic Generators Adjacent to Freeways,” <span class="text_deleted">4th</span><span class="text_added">5th</span> Edition/Guide Signs, Part II: Guidelines for Airport Guide Signing/Guide Signs, Part III: List of Control Cities for Use in Guide Signs on Interstate Highways,” Item Code: <span class="text_deleted">GSGLC-4</span><span class="text_added">GSLC</span>, <span class="text_deleted">2001</span><span class="text_added">2016</span> Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Highway Capacity Manual,” <span class="text_deleted">2000</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Edition (TRB)</li>

      <li>“<span class="text_deleted">Standard Specifications for</span><span class="text_added">LRFD</span> Movable Highway Bridge<span class="text_deleted">s</span><span class="text_added"> Design Specifications</span>,” <span class="text_deleted">1988</span><span class="text_added">2007</span> Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Maintaining Traffic Sign Retroreflectivity,” <span class="text_deleted">2007</span><span class="text_added">2013</span> Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <span class="text_added">

      <li>"Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware," 2009 Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      </span>

      <li>“Manual of Traffic Signal Design,” 1998 Edition (Institute of Transportation Engineers—ITE)</li>

      <li>“Manual of Transportation Engineering Studies,<span class="text_added"> 2nd Edition</span>” <span class="text_deleted">1994</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Edition (ITE)</li>

      <li class="known_error_added">“Methods for Maintaining Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity,” (FHWA-SA-22-028), 2022 Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“NEMA Standards Publication TS 4-<span class="text_deleted">2005</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Hardware Standards for Dynamic Message Signs (DMS) With NTCIP Requirements,” <span class="text_deleted">2005</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Edition (National Electrical Manufacturers Association—NEMA)</li>

      <li>“Occupational Safety and Health Administration Regulations (Standards – 29 CFR), General Safety and Health Provisions – 1926.20,” amended <span class="text_deleted">June 30, 1993</span><span class="text_added">December 12, 2008</span> (Occupational Safety and Health Administration—OSHA)</li>

      <li>“Pedestrian Traffic Control Signal Indications<span class="text_added">--</span><span class="text_deleted">,” Part 1—1985 Edition; Part 2 </span><span class="text_added">Light Emitting Diode </span>(LED<span class="text_added">)</span> Pedestrian Traffic Signal Modules<span class="text_added">,"</span><span class="text_deleted">)—2004</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Edition (ITE)</li>

      <li>“Practice for Roadway Lighting,” RP-8, 2001 (Illuminating Engineering Society—IES)</li>

      <li>“Preemption of Traffic Signals Near Railroad Crossings,” 2006 Edition (ITE)</li>

      <span class="text_deleted">

      <li>“Purchase Specification for Flashing and Steady Burn Warning Lights,” 1981 Edition (ITE)</li>

      </span>

      <li>“Railroad-Highway Grade Crossing Handbook—Revised Second Edition (FHWA-SA-07-010),” 2007 Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“Ramp Management and Control Handbook (FHWA-HOP-06-001),” 2006 Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“Recommended Procedures for the Safety Performance Evaluation of Highway Features,” (NCHRP Report 350), 1993 Edition (TRB)</li>

      <li>“Roadside Design Guide,” <span class="text_deleted">2006</span><span class="text_added">2011</span> Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Roundabouts-An Informational Guide<span class="text_added">. 2nd Edition</span><span class="text_deleted"> (FHWA-RD-00-067)</span><span class="text_added"> (NCHRP Report 672)</span>,” <span class="text_deleted">2000</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Edition (<span class="text_deleted">FHWA</span><span class="text_added">TRB</span>)</li>

      <li>“Safety Guide for the Prevention of Radio Frequency Radiation Hazards in the Use of Commercial Electric Detonators (Blasting Caps),” Safety Library Publication No. 20, <span class="text_deleted">July 2001</span><span class="text_added">2011</span> Edition (Institute of Makers of Explosives)</li>

      <li>“Signalized Intersections: an Informational Guide (FHWA-<span class="text_deleted">HRT-04-091</span><span class="text_added">SA-13-027</span>),” <span class="text_deleted">2004</span><span class="text_added">2013</span> Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“Signal Timing Manual (FHWA-HOP-08-024),” 2008 Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“The Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG),” July 1998 Edition (The U.S. Access Board)</li>

      <li>“Traffic Control Devices Handbook,” <span class="text_deleted">2001</span><span class="text_added">2013</span> Edition (ITE)</li>

      <li>“Traffic Detector Handbook,<span class="text_added"> Third Edition (FHWA-HRT-06-018 &amp; 139),</span>” <span class="text_deleted">1991</span><span class="text_added">2006</span> Edition (<span class="text_deleted">ITE</span><span class="text_added">FHWA</span>)</li>

      <li>“Traffic Engineering Handbook,” 2009 Edition (ITE)</li>

      <li>“Traffic Engineering Metric Conversion Folders—Addendum to the Guide to Metric Conversion,” 1993 Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <span class="text_deleted">

      <li>“Traffic Signal Lamps,” 1980 Edition (ITE)</li>

      </span>

      <li>“Travel Better, Travel Longer: A Pocket Guide to Improving Traffic Control and Mobility for Our Older Population (FHWA-OP-03-098),” 2003 Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“<span class="text_deleted">2009</span><span class="text_added">2014</span> AREMA Communications &amp; Signals Manual,” (American Railway Engineering &amp; Maintenance-of-Way Association—AREMA)</li>

      <li>“Uniform Vehicle Code (UVC) and Model Traffic Ordinance,<span class="text_deleted">”</span> 2000 Edition<span class="text_added">” and subsequent updates to "Rules of the Road" through 2014</span> (National Committee on Uniform Traffic <span class="text_deleted">Laws and Ordinances</span><span class="text_added">Control Devices</span>—<span class="text_deleted">NCUTLO</span><span class="text_added">NCUTCD</span>)</li>

      <li>“Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads<span class="text_added">:</span><span class="text_deleted">,” Part 1—1985 Edition; Part 2</span><span class="text_added">Light Emitting Diode</span> (LED<span class="text_added">)</span> Circular Signal Supplement<span class="text_added">, ”</span><span class="text_deleted">)—</span>2005 Edition<span class="text_deleted">; Part 3 (LED Vehicular Arrow Traffic Signal Supplement)—2004 Edition</span> (ITE)</li>

      <span class="text_added">

      <li>"Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads: Light Emitting Diode (LED) Vehicle Arrow Traffic Signal Supplement," 2007 Edition (ITE)</li>

      </span>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="paranum" id="section1A05_para04">04</span><span class="support">Contact information for the organizations that publish the references in the preceding list is contained in Appendix A3 of this Manual.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="paranum" id="section1A05_para05">05</span><span class="support">The provisions of this Manual have been developed based on the content included in the specific editions of the resources listed in Paragraph 3 of this Section. Newer editions of those resources are typically reflected in subsequent editions of or revisions to this Manual, which might result in one or more changes in the provisions to which the resources apply.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1A05_para01">06</span><span class="standard">To the extent that they are referenced in this Manual, the resources listed in this Section shall refer only to the specific edition cited. Subsequent editions of those resources shall not be applied to the provisions of this Manual until such time as it is officially revised.</span></span></p>

    <h3 id="section1A06"><span class="text_added">Section 1A.06 Uniform Vehicle Code - Rules of the Road</span></h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1A06_para01">01</span><span class="support">The “Uniform Vehicle Code<span class="text_added">”</span> (UVC)<span class="text_deleted">”</span>is one of the publications referenced in the MUTCD. The UVC contains a model set of motor vehicle codes and traffic laws for use throughout the United States<span class="text_added">, the intent of which is to promote national uniformity in these laws. The Rules of the Road contained in the UVC are intended to be recommendations or States to adopt in their State statutes and are not independently legally enforceable</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A06_para02">02</span> <span class="guidance">The actions required of road users to obey regulatory devices should be specified by State statute, or in cases not covered by State statute, <span class="text_deleted">by</span><span class="text_added">in</span> local ordinance<span class="text_added">s</span>or resolution<span class="text_added">s</span>. Such statutes, ordinances, and resolutions should be consistent with the “Uniform Vehicle Code” (see <a href="#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_deleted">11</span><span class="text_added">05</span></a>).</span><span class="note">This paragraph moved from the existing Introduction and existing Section 1A.02 and revised</span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>