<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<link href="https://fonts.cdnfonts.com/css/helvetica-neue-55" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 3A - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 3A. General</h1>

    <span class="text_deleted">
	<h3>Section 3A.01 Functions and Limitations</h3><span class="change_noted">Deleted (not needed)</span>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Markings on highways and on private roads open to public travel have important functions in providing guidance and information for the road user. Major marking types include pavement and curb markings, delineators, colored pavements, channelizing devices, and islands. In some cases, markings are used to supplement other traffic control devices such as signs, signals, and other markings. In other instances, markings are used alone to effectively convey regulations, guidance, or warnings in ways not obtainable by the use of other devices.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support">Markings have limitations. Visibility of the markings can be limited by snow, debris, and water on or adjacent to the markings. Marking durability is affected by material characteristics, traffic volumes, weather, and location. However, under most highway conditions, markings provide important information while allowing minimal diversion of attention from the roadway.</span></p>
	</span>

    <h3 id="section3A01">Section <span class="text_deleted">3A.02</span><span class="text_added">3A.01</span> Standardization of Application</h3>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Markings are used to supplement other traffic control devices such as signs, signals, and other markings. In other instances, markings are used alone to effectively convey regulations, guidance, or warnings in ways not obtainable by the use of other devices.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para02">02</span><span class="support">Markings can take many forms including road surface markings, curb markings, delineators, colored pavements, and channelizing devices.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Each standard marking shall be used only to convey the meaning prescribed for that marking in this Manual<span class="text_deleted">. W</span><span class="text_added">, including w</span>hen used for applications not described in this Manual<span class="text_deleted">, markings shall conform in all respects to the principles and standards set forth in this Manual</span>.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">Before any new highway, private road open to public travel (see definition in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A13">Section 1A.13</a>), paved detour, or temporary route is opened to public travel, all necessary markings should be in place.</span></p> <span class="change_noted">Relocated to Part 1</span></span>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para04">04</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">M</span><span class="text_added">Except as provided in Chapter 3H, m</span>arkings that must be visible at night shall be retroreflective unless <span class="text_added">the markings are adequately visible under street or highway lighting</span><span class="text_deleted">ambient illumination assures that the markings are adequately visible</span>. All markings on Interstate highways shall be retroreflective.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para05">05</span><span class="standard">Markings that are no longer applicable for roadway conditions or restrictions and that might cause confusion for the road user shall be removed or obliterated to be unidentifiable as a marking as soon as practical.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para06">06</span><span class="option">Until they can be removed or obliterated, markings <span class="text_added">that are no longer applicable for roadway conditions or restrictions </span>may be temporarily masked with <span class="text_added">non-reflective, performed </span>tape that is approximately the same color as the pavement<span class="text_added"> surface</span>.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section3A02">Section <span class="text_deleted">3A.04</span><span class="text_added">3A.02</span> Materials</h3>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Pavement and curb markings are commonly placed by using paints or thermoplastics; however, other suitable marking materials, including raised pavement markers and colored pavements, are also used. Delineators and channelizing devices are visibly placed in a vertical position similar to signs above the roadway.</span></p> <span class="change_noted">Not needed</span>
	</span>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A02_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">The materials used for markings should provide the specified color throughout their useful life.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Consideration should be given to selecting pavement marking materials that will minimize tripping or loss of traction for road users, including pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorcyclists.</span></p>

	<p><span class="text_added"><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3A02_para03">03</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted">Some m</span><span class="text_added">M</span>arking systems consist of clumps or droplets of material with visible open spaces of bare pavement between the material droplets<span class="text_deleted">. These marking systems</span><span class="text_added">, which</span> can function in a manner that is similar to the marking systems that completely cover the pavement surface<span class="text_deleted"> and are suitable for use</span><span class="text_added">, may be used</span> as pavement markings if they meet the other pavement marking requirements of the highway agency. </span> <span class="change_noted">Moved from Paragraph 2 of this section and rewritten as an Option</span></p>

    <h3 id="section3A03">Section <span class="text_deleted">3A.05</span><span class="text_added">3A.03</span> Colors</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Markings shall be yellow, white, red, blue, or purple. The colors for markings shall conform to the standard highway colors.<span class="text_deleted"> Black in conjunction with one of the colors mentioned in the first sentence of this paragraph shall be a usable color.</span></span></p>

	<p><span class="text_added"><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para02">02</span><span class="option">Black <span class="text_added change_from_npa">markings </span>may be used in combination with the colors mentioned in <span class="text_added">the first sentence of </span><a href="#section3A03_para01">Paragraph 1</a> <span class="text_deleted">where</span><span class="text_added">to enhance contrast with </span> a light-colored pavement<span class="text_deleted"> does not provide sufficient contrast with the markings</span>.</span> <span class="change_noted">Moved from Paragraph 8 of this section, with Paragraph 9 incorporated</span></p>
	
	<p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">When used, yellow markings for longitudinal lines shall delineate:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>The separation of traffic traveling in opposite directions,</li>

      <li>The left-hand edge of the roadways of divided highways and one-way streets or ramps, or</li>

      <li>The separation of two-way left-turn lanes and reversible lanes from other lanes.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para04">04</span><span class="standard">When used, white markings for longitudinal lines shall delineate:</span> <span class="change_noted">The sequence of this paragraph and the previous paragraph were reversed</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>The separation of traffic flows in the same direction, or</li>

      <li>The right-hand edge of the roadway.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para05">05</span><span class="standard">When used, red raised pavement markers or delineators shall delineate:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Truck escape ramps, or</li>

      <li>One-way roadways, ramps, or travel lanes that shall not be entered or used in the direction from which the markers are visible.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para06">06</span><span class="standard">When used, blue markings shall supplement white markings for parking spaces for persons with disabilities.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para07">07</span><span class="standard">When used, purple markings shall <span class="text_deleted">supplement lane line or edge line markings for toll plaza approach lanes that are restricted to use only by vehicles with registered electronic toll collection accounts</span><span class="text_added">be in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 3F and 3H</span>.</span> <span class="change_noted">Moved part of the Standard to new Chapter 3F and new Chapter 3H</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span> <span class="change_noted">Changed from Option to Standard</span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para07">07</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">Colors used for</span><span class="text_added">When pavement markings that simulate</span> official route <span class="text_deleted">shield </span>signs <span class="text_deleted">(see <a href="part2d.xhtml#section2D11">Section 2D.11</a>) may be</span><span class="text_added">are</span> used <span class="text_added">(see Section 3B.22), </span><span class="text_deleted">as colors of symbol markings to simulate route shields on the pavement (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B20">Section 3B.20</a>.)</span><span class="text_added">the colors shall be the same as those that are used for the official route signs (see Section 2D.11)</span></span> <span class="change_noted">Rerwritte as a Standard statement</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">When used in combination with other colors, black is not considered a marking color, but only a contrast-enhancing system for the markings.</span> <span class="change_noted">Incorporated into the relocated Paragraph 8 of this section</span></p></span>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para08">08</span><span class="support">Provisions regarding colored pavements are contained in Chapter 3H.</span></p>
	</span>

    <h3 id="section3A04">Section <span class="text_deleted">3A.06</span><span class="text_added">3A.04</span> Functions, Widths, and Patterns of Longitudinal Pavement Markings</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para01">01</span><span class="standard">The general functions of longitudinal lines shall be<span class="text_added"> as follows</span>:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>A double line indicates maximum or special restrictions<span class="text_deleted">,</span><span class="text_added">.</span></li>

      <li>A solid line discourages or prohibits crossing (depending on the specific application)<span class="text_deleted">,</span><span class="text_added">.</span></li>

      <li>A broken line indicates a permissive condition<span class="text_deleted">, and</span><span class="text_added">.</span></li>

      <li>A dotted <span class="text_added">lane </span>line provides <span class="text_deleted">guidance or </span>warning of a downstream change in lane function.</li>

		<li><span class="text_added">A dotted line used as a lane line or edge line extension guides vehicles through an intersection, a taper area, or an interchange ramp area.</span></li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para02">02</span><span class="standard">The widths and patterns of longitudinal lines shall be as follows:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Normal <span class="text_added">width </span>line—<span class="text_deleted">4 to </span>6 inches wide<span class="text_added"> for freeways, expressways, and ramps; 6 inches for all other roadways with speed limits &gt; 40 mph, 4 to 6 inches for all other roadways.</span>.</li>

      <li>Wide line—at least <span class="text_deleted">twice the width of a normal line</span><span class="text_added">8 inches in width if 4 inch or 5 inch normal width lines are used and at least 10 inches in width if 6 inch normal width lines are used</span>.</li>

      <li>Double line—two parallel lines separated by a discernible space.<span class="text_added"> The pavement surface shall be visible between the lines in the same way that is visible outside the lines, except where contrast markings are used in combination with the double line (see Section 3A.03).</span></li>

      <li>Broken line—normal <span class="text_added">width </span>line segments separated by gaps.</li>

      <li>Dotted line—noticeably shorter line segments separated by shorter gaps than used for a broken line. The width of a dotted line extension shall be at least the same as the width of the line it extends.</li>
    </ol>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The discernible space separating the parallel lines of a double line should not exceed that which is necessary to be recognized as a double line rather than two separate, disassociated single lines.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para04">04</span><span class="support">The width of the line indicates the degree of emphasis.</span></p>
	
	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para05">05</span><span class="support">Wide edge lines have been shown to be beneficial when applied in combination with horizontal alignment warning signs to enhance safety around curves and locations with a history of run off the road crashes (see Section 3B.09).</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Broken lines should consist of 10-foot line segments and 30-foot gaps, or dimensions in a similar ratio of line segments to gaps as appropriate for traffic speeds and need for delineation<span class="text_added">, except within the circulatory roadway of a circular intersection as provided in Section 3D.02</span>.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Patterns for dotted lines depend on the application (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B04">Sections 3B.04</a> and <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B08">3B.08</a>.)</span><span class="change_noted"> Incorporated into existing Paragraph 6 and edited</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">A dotted line used as a lane line <span class="text_added">(see Section 3B.07) </span>should consist of 3-foot line segments and 9-foot gaps. A dotted line for line extensions within an intersection<span class="text_deleted"> or</span><span class="text_added">,</span> taper area<span class="text_added">, or interchange ramp area</span> <span class="text_added">(see Section 3B.11) </span>should consist of 2-foot line segments and 2- to 6-foot gaps.</span> <span class="change_noted"> The sequence of these sentences was reversed</span></p>

	
	<h3 id="section3A05">Section <span class="text_deleted">3A.03</span><span class="text_added">3A.05</span> Maintaining Minimum Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity</h3>

	<span class="text_added">(This section reserved for future text based on FHWA rulemaking)</span>

	<span class="text_deleted">

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Except as provided in Paragraph 5, a method designed to maintain retroreflectivity at or above 50 mcd/m<span style="vertical-align: super;">2</span>/lx under dry conditions shall be used for longitudinal markings on roadways with speed limits of 35 mph or greater.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Except as provided in Paragraph 5, a method designed to maintain retroreflectivity at or above 100 mcd/m<span style="vertical-align: super;">2</span>/lx under dry conditions should be used for longitudinal </span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The method used to maintain retroreflectivity shuld be one or more of those described in “Methods for Maintaining Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>) or developed from an engineering study based on the values in Paragraphs 1 and 2.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para04">04</span><span class="support">Retroreflectivity levels for pavement markings are measured with an entrance angle of 88.76 degress and an observation angle of 1.05 degrees. This geometry is also referred to as 30-meter geometry. The unit of pavement marking retroreflectivity are reported in mcd/m<span style="vertical-align: super;">2</span>/lx, which means millicandelas per square meter per lux.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para05">05</span><span class="option">The following markings may be excluded from the provisions established in Paragraphs 1 and 2:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="option">
      <li>Markings where ambient illumination assures that the markings are adequately visible;</li>

      <li>Markings on streets or highways that have an ADT of less than 6,000 vehicles per day;</li>

      <li>Dotted extension lines that extend a longitudinal line through an intersection, major driveway, or interchange area (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B08">Section 3B.08</a>);</li>

      <li>Curb markings;</li>

      <li>Parking space markings; and</li>

      <li>Shared-use path markings.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para06">06</span><span class="support">The provisions of this section do not apply to non-longitudinal pavement markings including, but not limited to, the following:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Transverse markings;</li>

      <li>Word, symbol, and arrow markings;</li>

      <li>Crosswalk markings; and</li>

      <li>Chevron, diagonal, and crosshatch markings.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para07">07</span><span class="support">Special circumstances will periodically cause pavement marking retroreflectivity to be below the minimum levels. These circumstances include, but are not limited to, the following:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Isolated locations of abnormal degradation;</li>

      <li>Periods preceding imminent resurfacing or reconstruction;</li>

      <li>Unanticipated events such as equipment breakdowns, material shortages, and contracting problems; and</li>

      <li>Loss of retroreflectivity resulting from snow maintenance operations.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para08">08</span><span class="support">When such circumstances occur, compliance with paragraphs 1 and 2 is still considered to be achieved if a reasonable course of action is taken to resume maintenance of minimum retroreflectivity in a timely manner according to the maintaining agency's method(s), policies, and procedures.</span></p>
	</span>
  </div>
</body>
</html>