<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 1D - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1><span class="text_added">Chapter 1D. Provisions Applicable to Traffic Control Devices in General</span></h1>

	<h3 id="section1D01">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.02</span><span class="text_added">1D.01</span> <span class="text_added">Purpose and </span>Principles of Traffic Control Devices</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para01">01</span> <span class="support">The purpose of traffic control devices, as well as the principles for their use, is to promote highway safety and efficiency by providing for the orderly movement of all <span class="text_added">reasonable and prudent </span>road users on streets, highways, bikeways, and <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways</span>open to public travel throughout the Nation.<span class="text_added"> See <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A03">Section 1A.03</a> for additional information on target road users.</span></span><span class="note">This paragraph moved from existing Section A1.01</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para02">02</span> <span class="support">This Manual contains the basic principles that govern the design and use of traffic control devices for all streets, highways, bikeways, and <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways</span>open to public travel (see definition in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.02</span></a>) regardless of type or class or the public agency, official, or owner having jurisdiction. This Manual’s text specifies the restriction on the use of a device if it is intended for limited application or for a specific system. It is important that these principles be given primary consideration in the selection and application of each device.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">To be effective, a traffic control device should<span class="text_deleted"> meet five basic requirements</span>:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>Fulfill a need;</li>

      <li>Command attention;</li>

      <li>Convey a clear, simple meaning;</li>

      <li>Command respect from road users; and</li>

      <li>Give adequate time for proper response.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para04">04</span> <span class="guidance">Design, placement, operation, maintenance, and uniformity are aspects that should be carefully considered in order to maximize the ability of a traffic control device to <span class="text_deleted">meet the five requirements </span><span class="text_added">be consistent with the five principles </span>listed in the <a href="#section1D01_para03"><span class="text_deleted">previous</span><span class="text_added">preceding</span>paragraph</a>. Vehicle speed should be carefully considered as an element that governs the design, operation, placement, and location of various traffic control devices.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para05">05</span> <span class="guidance">The proper use of traffic control devices should provide the reasonable and prudent road user with the information necessary to efficiently and lawfully use the streets, highways, pedestrian facilities, and bikeways.</span><span class="note">This paragraph relocated from later in this Section</span></p>

	<span class="text_added"><p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para06">06</span><span class="standard">All traffic control devices used on site roadways open to public travel shall have the same shape, color, and meaning as those required by the MUTCD for use on public highways, except as provided in Paragraph 5 of <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A03">Section 1A.03</a>. Sign size exceptions are noted in each Chapter as applicable.</span></p></span>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">The definition of the word “speed” varies depending on its use. The definitions of specific speed terms are contained in <a href="#section1A13">Section 1A.13</a>.</span></p></span>

    <h3 id="section1D02"><span class="text_added">Section 1D.02 Traffic Control Device Characteristics and Activities</span></h3>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para01">01</span><span class="support">The characteristics and activities associate with traffic control devices are:</span></p>
	<ol type="A" class="support">
		<li>Meaning—The message the device is intended to convey and the expected road user response to te device.</li>
		<li>Appearance—The general physical characteristics of a specific device as it appears to the road user. These characteristics include color, shape, legend, acoustical and tactile features, and the relative position and layout of individual elements.</li>
		<li>Use (Application)—The process of making a decision to use a specific device at a specific location and the manner and criteria by which such a decision is made given the specific circumstances at that location.</li>
		<li>Installation—The process of determining the proper position for a device and providing appropriate visibility for the device. Considerations related to installation include height, lateral distance (offset), longitudinal distance from a reference point, and distance from other devices. Installation also includes addressing the visibility/detection of a device. In addition to height, lateral distance, and longitudinal distance, visibility/detection incorporates size, conspicuity, and contrast with the environmental background. The physical activity of installing a device is not an activity for MUTCD content purposes.</li>
		<li>Operation—The process of establishing how the physical characteristics of a device changes over a relatively short period of time to impact the movement of traffic. Most traffic control devices are static and do not have an operational aspect. However, some devices do operate (such as traffic control signals and changeable message signs). Operation does not include gradual deterioration over an extended period of time of physical characteristics due to aging, weather, or other factors.</li>
		<li>Maintenance—The process of monitoring the visibility, crashworthiness, operational, acoustical and tactile features of a device and its performance and taking appropriate actions so that it will function in the intended manner throughout the life of the device and be replaced at the end of its useful life.</li>
		<li>Removal—The process of determining when to remove a specific device from service.</li>
	</ol>

	</span>

	<h3 id="section1D03">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.06</span><span class="text_added">1D.03</span> Uniformity of Traffic Control Devices</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para01">01</span><span class="support">Uniformity of the meaning of traffic control devices is vital to their effectiveness. <span class="text_deleted">The meanings ascribed to devices in this Manual are in general accord with the publications mentioned in <a href="#section1A11">Section 1A.11</a>. </span>Uniformity means treating similar situations in a similar way. <span class="note">The first sentence of this paragraph moved from existing section 1A.02; third sentence moved from later in existing Section 1A.06</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para02">02</span><span class="support">Uniformity of devices simplifies the task of the road user because it aids in recognition and understanding, thereby reducing perception/reaction time. Uniformity assists road users, law enforcement officers, and traffic courts by giving everyone the same interpretation. Uniformity assists public highway officials through efficiency in manufacture, installation, maintenance, and administration.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para03">03</span><span class="support">The use of uniform traffic control devices does not, in itself, constitute uniformity. A standard device used where it is not appropriate is as objectionable as a non-standard device; in fact, this might be worse, because such misuse might result in disrespect at those locations where the device is needed and appropriate.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section1D04">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.07</span><span class="text_added">1D.04</span> Responsibility <span class="text_added">and Authority </span>for Traffic Control Devices</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">The responsibility for the design, placement, operation, maintenance, and uniformity of traffic control devices <span class="text_added">in compliance with the provisions of this Manual </span>shall rest with the public agency or the official having jurisdiction, or, in the case of <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways or private toll roads</span>open to public travel, with the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.<span class="text_deleted"> 23 CFR 655.603 adopts the MUTCD as the national standard for all traffic control devices installed on any street, highway, bikeway, or private road open to public travel (see definition in <a href="#section1A13">Section 1A.13</a>). When a State or other Federal agency manual or supplement is required, that manual or supplement shall be in substantial conformance with the National MUTCD.</span></span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">The Introduction of this Manual contains information regarding the meaning of substantial conformance and the applicability of the MUTCD to private roads open to public travel.</span></p></span>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support">The “Uniform Vehicle Code” (see <a href="#section1A11">Section 1A.11</a>) has the following provision in Section 15-104 for the adoption of a uniform manual:</span></p>

    <ol type="a" class="support">
      <li>“The [State Highway Agency] shall adopt a manual and specification for a uniform system of traffic control devices consistent with the provisions of this code for use upon highways within this State. Such uniform system shall correlate with and so far as possible conform to the system set forth in the most recent edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, and other standards issued or endorsed by the Federal Highway Administrator.”</li>

      <li>“The Manual adopted pursuant to subsection (a) shall have the force and effect of law.”</li>
    </ol></span> <span class="note">Paragraph deleted; all States have a law on adoption and have adopted the MUTCD; this is covered in new Section 1B.02</span>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/>  <span class="guidance">States should adopt Section 15-116 of the “Uniform Vehicle Code,” which states that, “No person shall install or maintain in any area of private property used by the public any sign, signal, marking, or other device intended to regulate, warn, or guide traffic unless it conforms with the State manual and specifications adopted under Section 15-104.”</span></p></span><span class="note">This paragraph deleted; duplicative of text in new Section 1B.01</span>

	    <h3><span class="text_deleted">Section 1A.08 Authority for Placement of Traffic Control Devices</span></h3>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para02">02</span><span class="standard">All regulatory traffic control devices shall be supported by laws, ordinances, or regulations.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para03">03</span> <span class="standard">Traffic control devices, <span class="text_deleted">advertisements, </span><span class="text_added">public </span>announcements<span class="text_added"> or notices</span>, and other signs or messages within the highway right-of-way shall be placed only as authorized by a public authority or the official having jurisdiction, or, in the case of <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways or private toll roads</span>open to public travel, by the private owner or private official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para04">04</span> <span class="standard">When the public agency or the official having jurisdiction over a street or highway or, in the case of private roads open to public travel, the private owner or private official having jurisdiction, has granted proper authority, others such as contractors and public utility companies shall be permitted to install temporary traffic control devices in temporary traffic control zones. Such traffic control devices shall <span class="text_deleted">conform</span><span class="text_added">comply</span> with the <span class="text_deleted">Standards</span><span class="text_added">provisions</span>of this Manual.</span></p>

    

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Provisions of this Manual are based upon the concept that effective traffic control depends upon both appropriate application of the devices and reasonable enforcement of the regulations.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support">Although some highway design features, such as curbs, median barriers, guardrails, speed humps or tables, and textured pavement, have a significant impact on traffic operations and safety, they are not considered to be traffic control devices and provisions regarding their design and use are generally not included in this Manual.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para05">05</span><span class="standard">Signs and other devices that do not have any traffic control purpose that are placed within the highway right-of-way shall not be located where they will interfere with, or detract from, traffic control devices.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">Any unauthorized traffic control device or other sign or message placed on the highway right-of-way by a private organization or individual constitutes a public nuisance and should be removed. All unofficial or non-essential traffic control devices, signs, or messages should be removed.</span></p></span>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para06">06</span><span class="support">23 CFR 1.23(b) requires that the highway right-of-way be used exclusively for highway purposes.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para07">07</span><span class="support">States are encouraged to adopt, through policy or legislation, the provisions of 23 CFR 750.108 that restrict outdoor advertising from resembling traffic control devices.</span></p>
	</span>

	<h3 id="section1D05">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.09</span><span class="text_added">1D.05</span> Engineering Study and Engineering Judgment</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para01">01</span> <span class="support">Definitions of <span class="text_deleted">an</span><span class="text_added">professional engineer,</span> engineering study<span class="text_added">,</span>and engineering judgment are contained in <a href="#section1C02">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.02</span></a>.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added"><p><span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para02">02</span><span class="support">The application of engineering study and engineering judgement is a fundamental tenet of the application of traffic control devices. It is for this reason that, in most cases, the selection of a particular device is not required by a Standard provision, but is determined by engineering study or engineering judgement. Many Standard provisions in this Manual specifically require, by explicit language in the individual provisions or by implication, the application of engineering study or engineering judgement in applying those Standards. Site-specific conditions might result in the determination that it is impossible or impracticable to comply with a Standard. In such a case, a deviation from the requirement of a particular Standard at that location might be the only possibility. In such limited, specific cases, the deviation is allowed, provided that the agency or official having jurisdiction fully document, through engineering study, the engineering basis for the deviation.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para03">03</span><span class="standard">This Manual describes the application of traffic control devices, but shall not be a legal requirement for their installation.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">The decision to use a particular device at a particular location should be made on the basis of either an engineering study or the application of engineering judgment. Thus, while this Manual provides Standards, Guidance, and Options for design and applications of traffic control devices, this Manual should not be considered a substitute for engineering judgment. Engineering judgment should be exercised in the selection and application of traffic control devices, as well as in the location and design of roads and streets that the devices complement.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">Early in the processes of location and design of roads and streets, engineers should coordinate such location and design with the design and placement of the traffic control devices to be used with such roads and streets.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Jurisdictions, or owners of <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways or private toll roads</span>open to public travel, with responsibility for traffic control that do not have engineers on their staffs who are trained and/or experienced in traffic control devices should seek engineering assistance from others, such as the State transportation agency, their county, a nearby large city, or a traffic engineering consultant.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span> <span class="note">Revisions to the following Support paragraphs are based on Official Ruling No. 1(09)-1(I)</span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para07">07</span><span class="support">The provisions of this Manual are intended to be inrepreted and applied by engineers or those under the supervision of an engineer. The construction of the provisions of this Manual, therefore, are informed by bases referenced in Paragraphs 8 and 9 of this Section.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para08">08</span><span class="support">The National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) has defined the practice of engineering as "any service or creative work requiring engineering education, training, and experience in the application of engineering principles and the interpretation of engineering data to engineering activities that potentially impact the health, safety, and welfare of the public." The practice of engineering is, therefore, subject to regulation in the public interest and is regulated by the State licensing boards in order to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The NCEES has defined an engineer as "an individual who is qualified to practice engineering by reason of engineering education, training, and experience in the application of engineering principles and the interpretation of engineering data."</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para08">08</span><span class="support">The U.S. office of Personnel Management (OPM) has defined the professional knowledge of engineering as "the comprehensive, in-depth knowledge of mathematical, physical, and engineering sciences applicable to a specialty field of engineering that characterizes a full 4-year engineering program leading to a bachelor's degree, or the equivalent." The OPM has defined professional ability to apply engineering knowledge as "the ability to (a) apply fundamental and diversified professional engineering concepts, theories, and practices to achieve engineering objectives with versatility, judgment, and perception; (b) adapt and apply methods and techniques of related scientific disciplines; and (c) organize, analyze, interpret, and evaluate scientific data in the solution of engineering problems."</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para09">09</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted">As part of the Federal-aid Program, each State is required to have a Local Technical Assistance Program (LTAP) and to provide technical assistance to local highway agencies. </span>Requisite technical training in the application of the principles of the MUTCD is available from the State’s Local Technical Assistance Program<span class="text_added"> (LTAP)</span>for needed engineering guidance and assistance.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section1D06">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.03</span><span class="text_added">1D.06</span> Design of Traffic Control Devices</h3>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Devices should be designed so that features such as size, shape, color, composition, lighting or retroreflection, and contrast are combined to draw attention to the devices; that size, shape, color, and simplicity of message combine to produce a clear meaning; that legibility and size combine with placement to permit adequate time for response; and that uniformity, size, legibility, and reasonableness of the message combine to command respect.</span></p>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para02">02</span><span class="option"><span class="text_deleted">With the e</span><span class="text_added">E</span>xcept<span class="text_deleted">ion of</span><span class="text_added"> for</span> symbols and colors, minor modifications in the specific design elements of a device may be made <span class="text_added">based on an engineering study or engineering judgment, in accordance with Paragraph 3 of this Section, </span>provided the essential appearance characteristics are preserved.</span><span class="note">This paragraph moved from later in this Section</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para03">03</span> <span class="guidance">Aspects of a <span class="text_added">traffic control </span>device’s standard design should <span class="text_added">not </span>be modified <span class="text_deleted">only if</span><span class="text_added">unless</span>there is a demonstrated need<span class="text_added"> in unusual circumstances, based on an engineering study or engineering judgment</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para04">04</span><span class="support">An example of modifying a device’s design would be to modify the Combination Horizontal Alignment/Intersection (W1-10) sign to show intersecting side roads on both sides rather than on just one side of the major road within the curve.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/>
	<span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para05">05</span><span class="standard">Shapes that are exclusive to a particular sign (e.g., octagon for Stop, pennant for No Passing Zone, or circle for Railroad Advance) shall not be obscured by another sign mounted on the back of the same assembly.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para06">06</span><span class="standard">Colors (see <a href="#section1D07">Section 1D.07</a>) shall be consistent across the face of a sign or a sign panel. Color gradients (smooth or defined gradual transitions either within a color or transition to another color) shall not be allowed.</span></p>
	</span>

    <h3 id="section1D07">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.12</span><span class="text_added">1D.07</span> Color Code</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D07_para01">01</span><span class="support">The following color code establishes general meanings for 11 colors of a total of 13 colors that have been identified as being appropriate for use in conveying traffic control information.</span></p>
    
    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D07_para02">02</span><span class="standard">The general meaning of the 13 colors shall be as follows:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Black—regulation</li>

      <li>Blue—road<span class="text_deleted"> </span><span class="text_added">-</span>user services guidance, tourist information, and evacuation route</li>

      <li>Brown—recreational and cultural interest area guidance</li>

      <li>Coral—unassigned<span class="text_added"> (reserved for future designation</span></li>

      <li>Fluorescent Pink—incident management</li>

      <li>Fluorescent Yellow-Green—pedestrian warning, bicycle warning, playground warning, school bus and school warning</li>

      <li>Green—indicated movements <span class="text_added">or actions </span>permitted, direction guidance</li>

      <li>Light Blue—unassigned<span class="text_added"> (reserved for future designation</span></li>

      <li>Orange—temporary traffic control</li>

      <li>Purple—<span class="text_deleted">lanes </span>restricted to use only by vehicles with registered electronic toll collection (ETC) accounts</li>

      <li>Red—stop or prohibition</li>

      <li>White—regulation</li>

      <li>Yellow—warning</li>
    </ol>

	<span class="text_added"><p><span class="paranum" id="section1D07_para03">03</span><span class="standard">These colors shall be used only as prescribed for the specific devices or applications throughout this Manual.</span></p></span>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D07_para04">04</span><span class="support">The two colors for which general meanings have not yet been assigned are being reserved for future applications that will be determined only by FHWA after consultation with the States, the engineering community, and the general public. The meanings described in this Section are of a general nature. More specific assignments of colors are given in the individual Parts of this Manual relating to each class of devices.</span><span class="note">This paragraph moved from earlier in the Section</span></p>

	<p> <span class="paranum" id="section1D07_para05">05</span><span class="support">Tolerance limits for each color are contained in 23 CFR Part 655, Appendix to Subpart F and are available at the Federal Highway Administration’s MUTCD <span class="text_deleted">website</span><span class="text_added">Web site</span> at <a href="../../index.html">http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov</a> or by writing to the FHWA, Office of Safety Research and Development (HRD-T-301), 6300 Georgetown Pike, McLean, VA 22101. </span><span class="note">This paragraph moved from earlier in the Section</span></p>

	<h3 id="section1D08"><span class="text_added">Section 1D.08 Public Domain, Copyrights, and Patents</span></h3>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para01">01</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">Any t</span><span class="text_added">T</span>raffic control device design or application provision<span class="text_added">s</span> contained in this Manual shall be <span class="text_deleted">considered to be </span>in the public domain. Traffic control devices contained in this Manual shall not be protected by a patent, trademark, or copyright, except for the Interstate Shield<span class="text_added">, 511 Travel Information pictograph,</span> and any items owned by FHWA.</span><span class="note">This paragraph moved from the existing Introduction.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para02">02</span><span class="standard">A traffic control device design or application shall not be eligible for official experimentation (see Section 1B.05) or interim approval (see Section 1B.07) unless it is in the public domain. Express abandonment of any and all forms of proprietary protection, such as patents, trademarks, or copyrights, related to the design and application of hte traffic control device shall satisfy the requirement for the traffic control device to be in the public domain.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para03">03</span><span class="standard">The requirement for the traffic control device to be in the public domain shall not apply to individual components used in the assembly or manufacture of the traffic control device.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para04">04</span><span class="support">The limitation on patented, trademarked, or copyrighted traffic control devices applies to the message that the device conveys to the road user. If a patent or other protection covers the device's communication to the road user by virtue of its appearance, audible message, or other aspects of the message conveyed (e.g., the order in which traffic control signal indications change from green to yellow to red), then the device is considered to be protected and not in the public domain. Such a device is precluded from inclusion in this Manual. The purpose of this limitation is to ensure enuiformity of the messaging of individually approved traffic control devices. This limitation does not apply to other aspects of a device (e.g., internal controls, circuitry, electronics, mechanics, housing, etc.) so long as the appearance, audible ,essage, or other aspects of the message conveyed, including the manner of conveyance, remain freely reproducible by all without infriging on any proprietary rights or interests. This Manual does not prohibit such other aspects of a traffic control device that meet the legal requirements from being protected through patent, trademark, or copyright; and does not restrict components, parts, manufacturing processes, or similar aspects of traffic control devices from being patented or otherwise protected.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para05">05</span><span class="support">Pictographs, as defined in Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.02</span>, are embedded in traffic control devices but the pictographs themselves are not considered traffic control devices for the purposes of Paragraph 4<span class="text_added"> of this Section</span>.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para06">06</span><span class="support"><span class="text_added">Business identification logos, as defined in Section 1C.02, are embedded in traffic control devices but the pictographs themselves are not considered traffic control devices for the purposes of Paragraph 4 of this Section.</span></span></p>

	<h3 id="section1D09"><span class="text_added">Section 1D.09 Advertising</span></h3>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">Traffic control devices or their supports shall not bear any advertising message or any other message that is not related to traffic control.</span><span class="note">This paragraph moved from existing Section 1A.01</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para02">02</span> <span class="support">Tourist-oriented <span class="text_deleted">d</span><span class="text_added">D</span>irectional signs<span class="text_added">,</span> <span class="text_deleted">and </span>Specific Service signs<span class="text_added">, and Acknowledgement signs</span> are not considered advertising; rather, they are classified as motorist service signs.</span><span class="note">This paragraph moved from existing Section 1A.01</span></p>

	<h3 id="section1D10">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.15</span><span class="text_added">1D.10</span> Abbreviations Used on Traffic Control Devices</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D10_para01">01</span><span class="standard">When the word messages shown in <a href="#table1D01">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-1</span><span class="text_added">1D-1</span></a> need to be abbreviated in connection with traffic control devices, the abbreviations shown in Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-1</span><span class="text_added">1D-1</span>shall be used.</span></p>

    <table border="0" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="0" summary="List of abbreviations for word messages" id="table1D01">
      <caption>Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-1</span><span class="text_added">1D-1</span>. Acceptable Abbreviations</caption>

      <thead>
		<tr>
		<th colspan="2">General Abbreviations</th>
		</tr>
        <tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
          <th class="tablecell-top-left-cell" scope="col">
            Word Message
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-top-right-cell" scope="col">
            Standard Abbreviation
          </th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Afternoon / Evening
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            PM
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Alternate
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            ALT
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            AM Radio
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            AM
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Avenue
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">AVE, AV</span><span class="text_added">Ave, Av*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Bicycle<span class="text_added">s</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            BIKE<span class="text_added">, BIKES</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Boulevard
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">BLVD*</span><span class="text_added">Blvd*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Bridge
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            (See <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added"></span>1D-2</a>)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            CB Radio
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            CB
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Center<span class="text_deleted"> (as part of a place name)</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">CTR</span><span class="text_added">Ctr**</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Circle
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">CIR*</span><span class="text_added">Cir*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Civil Defense
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            CD
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Compressed Natural Gas
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            CNG
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Court
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">CT*</span><span class="text_added">Ct*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Crossing (other than highway-rail)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            X-ING
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Drive
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">DR*</span><span class="text_added">Dr*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            East
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            E
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Electric Vehicle
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            EV
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Expressway
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">EXPWY*</span><span class="text_added">Expwy*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Feet
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            FT
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            FM Radio
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            FM
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Freeway
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">FRWY, FWY*</span><span class="text_added">Fwy*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Friday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">FRI</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Hazardous Material<span class="text_added">(s)</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            HAZMAT<span class="text_added">, HAZMATS</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            High Occupancy Vehicle
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            HOV
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Highway
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">HWY*</span><span class="text_added">Hwy*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Hospital
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            HOSP
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Hour(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            HR, HRS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Information
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            INFO
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Inherently Low Emission Vehicle
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            ILEV
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            International
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">INTL</span><span class="text_added">Intl</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Interstate
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            (See <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a>)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Junction / Intersection
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            JCT
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Lane
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">LA*, LN*</span>(See <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a>)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Liquid Propane Gas
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            LP-GAS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Maximum
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MAX
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Mile(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MI
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Miles Per Hour
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MPH
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Minimum
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MIN
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Minute(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MIN
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Monday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MON
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Morning / Late Night
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            AM
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Mount
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">MT</span><span class="text_added">Mt**</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Mountain
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">MTN</span><span class="text_added">Mtn**</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            National
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">NATL</span><span class="text_added">Natl**</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            North
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            N
          </td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">Northeast</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">NE</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">Northwest</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">NW</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Parkway
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">PKWY*</span><span class="text_added">Pkwy*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Pedestrian<span class="text_added">(s)</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            PED<span class="text_added">, PEDS</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Place
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">PL*</span><span class="text_added">Pl*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Pounds
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            LBS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Road
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">RD*</span><span class="text_added">Rd*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Saint
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">ST</span><span class="text_added">St**</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Saturday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">SAT</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            South
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            S
          </td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">Southeast</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">EE</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">Southwest</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">SW</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            State, county, or other non-US<br/>

            or non-Interstate numbered route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            (See <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a>)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Street
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">ST*</span><span class="text_added">St*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Sunday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">SUN</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Telephone
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            PHONE
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Temporary
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            TEMP
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Terrace
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">TER*</span><span class="text_added">Ter*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Thursday
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            THURS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Thruway
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">THWY*</span><span class="text_added">Thwy*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Ton<span class="text_added">(s)</span><span class="text_deleted">s of Weight</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            T
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Trail
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">TR*</span><span class="text_added">Tr*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Tuesday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">TUES</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Turnpike
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">TPK*</span><span class="text_added">Tpk*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Two-Way Intersection<span class="text_added">, Two-Way Traffic</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            2-WAY
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            US Numbered Route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="known_error_deleted">US</span><span class="known_error_added">(See <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a>)</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Wednesday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">WED</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            West
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            W
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
		<th colspan="2"><span class="text_added">Days of the Week</span></th>
		</tr>
		<tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
          <th class="tablecell-top-left-cell" scope="col">
            <span class="text_added">Day</span>
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-top-right-cell" scope="col">
            <span class="text_added">Standard Abbreviation</span>
          </th>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Sunday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">SUN</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Monday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">MON</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Tuesday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">TUES</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Wednesday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">WED</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Thursday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">THURS</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Friday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">FRI</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Saturday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">SAT</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    <p class="tablenote">*This abbreviation shall not be used for any application other than the name of a roadway.<span class="text_added"> See <a href="part2d.xhtml#table2D03">Table 2D-3</a> for complete list of street name descriptors.<br/>Examples include: Bayshore Fwy, Cross County Hwy, Mid-County Pkwy</span><br/>
	<span class="text_added">
	**Abbreviation shall not be used for any application other than as a descriptor or title within a proper name.<br/>Examples include: Vestal Ctr, Mt Hope, Pocono Mtn, Eldorado Natl Forest, St Louis<br/>
	Note: Abbreviations shown in upper- and lower-case lettering may be in all upper-case lettering when displayed on a changeable message sign with lower resolution that will not accommodate lower-case letter forms. See <a href="part2l.xhtml">Chapter 2L</a> of this Manual.
	</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D10_para02">02</span><span class="standard">When the word messages shown in <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a> need to be abbreviated on a portable changeable message sign, the abbreviations shown in Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span>shall be used. Unless indicated by an asterisk, these abbreviations shall only be used on portable changeable message signs.</span></p>

    <table border="0" cellpadding="2" dir="ltr" cellspacing="0" summary="List of abbreviations for word messages on portable changeable message signs" id="table1D02">
      <caption>Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span>. Abbreviations that Shall be Used Only on Portable Changeable Message Signs</caption>

      <thead>
        <tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
          <th class="tablecell-top-left-cell" scope="col">
            Word Message
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-toprow" scope="col">
            Standard <br/>Abbreviation
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-toprow" scope="col">
            Prompt Word <span class="text_deleted">That Should </span><br/>

            Preced<span class="text_deleted">e</span><span class="text_added">ing</span> the <br/>Abbreviation
          </th>

          <th align="center" class="tablecell-toprow" scope="col">
            Prompt Word <span class="text_deleted">That Should</span> <br/>
            Follow<span class="text_added">ing</span> the <br/>Abbreviation
          </th>
			<th align="center" class="tablecell-top-right-cell" scope="col">
            <span class="text_added">Example</span>
          </th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Access
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            ACCS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Road
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">ACCS ROAD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Ahead
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            AHD
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Fog
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">FOG AHD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Blocked
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            BLKD
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Lane
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">2 LANES BLKD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Bridge
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            BR*
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            [Name]
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">BAY BR</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Cannot
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CANT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Center
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CNTR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">CNTR LANE, CNTR LN</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Chemical
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CHEM
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Spill
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">CHEM SPILL</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Condition
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            COND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Traffic
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">TRAFFIC COND</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Congested
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CONG
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Traffic
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">TRAFFIC CONG AHD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Construction
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CONST
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Ahead
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">CONST AHEAD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Crossing
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            XING
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">PED XING</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Do Not
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            DONT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Downtown
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            DWNTN
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Traffic
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">DWNTN TRAFFIC</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Eastbound
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">EAST</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">Route Number, Road Name</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">I-4 EAST</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            E-BND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">—</span><span class="text_added">Lane, Traffic</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">E-BND LANE</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Emergency
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            EMER
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">EMER VEHICLES</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Entrance, Enter
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            ENT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">ENT TO I-90</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Exit
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            EX
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Next
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">NEXT EX</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Express
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            EXP
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">EXP LANE OPEN</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Frontage
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            FRNTG
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Road
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">FRNTG RD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Hazardous
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            HAZ
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Driving
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">HAZ DRIVING</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Highway-Rail Grade Crossing
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RR XING
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">RR XING</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Interstate
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            I-*
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            [Number]
          </td>
			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">I-80</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            It Is
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            ITS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Lane<span class="text_added">(s) (travel lanes of a highway)</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LN
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_deleted">[Roadway Name]*,<br/></span>
            Right, Left, Center
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">LEFT LN ONLY<br/>2 RIGHT LNS</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Left
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LFT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_deleted">—</span><span class="text_added">Keep, Next</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">NEXT LFT</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LFT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">—</span><span class="text_added">Lane</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">LFT LANE</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Local
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LOC
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Traffic
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">LOC TRAFFIC ONLY</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Lower
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LWR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Level
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">LWR LEVEL</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Maintenance
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            MAINT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">ROAD MAINT</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Major
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            MAJ
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Accident</span><span class="text_added">Crash</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">MAJ CRASH</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Minor
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            MNR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Accident</span><span class="text_added">Crash</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">MNR CRASH</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Normal
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            NORM
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Northbound
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">NORTH</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">Route Number, Road Name</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">US 1 NORTH</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            N-BND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">—</span><span class="text_added">Lane, Traffic</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">N-BND TRAFFIC</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Oversized
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            OVRSZ
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Load
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">OVRSZ LOAD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Parking
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            PKING
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Pavement
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            PVMT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_deleted">Wet</span><span class="text_added">Icy</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">ICY PVMT</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Prepare
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            PREP
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            To Stop
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">PREP TO STOP</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Quality
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            QLTY
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Air
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">AIR QLTY</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Right
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Keep, Next
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">KEEP RT</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">RT LANE</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Roadwork
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RDWK
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Ahead, [Distance]
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">RD WK 1 MILE</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_deleted">RT, </span>RTE
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Best
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">BEST RTE</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Service
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SERV
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">SERV AREA OPEN</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Shoulder
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SHLDR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">SHLDR CLOSED</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Slippery
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SLIP
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Southbound
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">SOUTH</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">Route Number, Road Name</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">CA 1 SOUTH</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            S-BND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">Lane, Traffic</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">S-BND TRAFFIC</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Speed
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SPD
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">SPD LIMIT</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            State, county, or other non-US <br/>

            or non-Interstate numbered route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            [Route Abbreviation <br/>

            determined by <br/>

            highway agency]*
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            [Number]**
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">NY 7, CR 43</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Tires With Lugs
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LUGS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Traffic
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            TRAF
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Travelers
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            TRVLRS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Two-Wheeled Vehicles
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CYCLES
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Upper
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            UPR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Level
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">UPR LEVEL</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn known_error_added">
            US Numbered Route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior known_error_added">
            US
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior known_error_added">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn known_error_added">
            [Number]**
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">US 202</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Vehicle(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            VEH, VEHS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Warning
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            WARN
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Westbound
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">WEST</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">Route Number, Road Name</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">IL 53 WEST</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            W-BND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">—</span><span class="text_added">Lane, Traffic</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">W-BND LANES</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>


        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            Will Not
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottomrow">
            WONT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottomrow">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottomrow">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    <p><span class="tablenote">* This abbreviation, when accompanied by the prompt word, may be used on traffic control devices other than portable message signs.<span class="text_added">See Table 1D-1 for uses and format.</span><br/> ** A space and no <span class="text_deleted">dash</span><span class="text_added">hyphen</span> shall be placed between the abbreviation and the number of the route.<br/>Note: See <a href="part2l.xhtml">Chapter 2L</a> of this Manual for additional information on changeable message signs</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D10_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The abbreviations for the words listed in <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a> that also show a prompt word should not be used on a Portable Changeable Message sign <span class="text_added">(or a static sign if indicated in Table 1D-2 by an asterisk) </span>unless the prompt word shown in Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span>either precedes or follows the abbreviation, as applicable.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D10_para04">04</span><span class="standard">The abbreviations shown in <a href="#table1D03">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-3</span><span class="text_added">1D-3</span></a> shall not be used in connection with traffic control devices because of their potential to be misinterpreted by road users.</span></p>

    <table border="0" cellpadding="2" dir="ltr" cellspacing="0" summary="List of abbreviations not to use" id="table1D03">
      <caption>Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-3</span><span class="text_added">1D-3</span>. Unacceptable Abbreviations</caption>

      <thead>
        <tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
          <th class="tablecell-top-left-cell" scope="col">
            Abbreviation
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-toprow" scope="col">
            Intended Word
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-top-right-cell" scope="col">
            Common Misinterpretations
          </th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            ACC
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Accident
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Access (Road)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            CLRS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Clears
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Colors
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            DLY
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Delay
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Daily
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            FDR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Feeder
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Federal
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            L
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Left
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane (Merge)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            LT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Light (Traffic)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Left
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            PARK
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Parking
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Park
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            POLL
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Pollution (Index)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Poll
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            RED
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Reduce
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Red
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            STAD
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Stadium
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Standard
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            WRNG
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottomrow">
            Warning
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            Wrong
          </td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D10_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">If <span class="text_deleted">multiple abbreviations are permitted in </span><a href="#table1D01">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-1</span><span class="text_added">1D-1</span></a> or <a href="#table1D02"><span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a><span class="text_added"> indicates that more than one abbreviation is permitted for a given word or phrase</span>, the same abbreviation should be used throughout a single jurisdiction.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D10_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Except as otherwise provided in <a href="#table1D01">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-1</span><span class="text_added">1D-1</span></a> or <a href="#table1D02"><span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a> or unless necessary to avoid confusion, periods, commas, apostrophes, question marks, ampersands, and other punctuation marks or characters that are not letters or numerals should not be used in any abbreviation.</span></p>


    <h3 id="section1D11">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.04</span><span class="text_added">1D.11</span> Placement and Operation of Traffic Control Devices</h3>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label"><span class="text_added">Standard:</span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D11_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">Before any new highway, <span class="text_deleted">private road</span><span class="text_added">site roadway</span> open to public travel (see definition in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.02</span></a>), <span class="text_deleted">paved </span>detour, or temporary route is opened to public travel, all necessary <span class="text_deleted">markings</span><span class="text_added">traffic control devices</span> <span class="text_deleted">should</span><span class="text_added">shall</span> be in place.</span><span class="note">Relocated from exisitng Sections 3A.01 and 6B.01 and changed from Guidance to Standard</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D11_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Placement of a traffic control device should be within the road user’s view so that adequate visibility is provided. To aid in conveying the proper meaning, the traffic control device should be appropriately positioned with respect to the location, object, or situation to which it applies. The location and legibility of the traffic control device should be such that a road user has adequate time to make the proper response in both day and night conditions.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D11_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Traffic control devices should be placed and operated in a uniform and consistent manner.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D11_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Unnecessary traffic control devices should be removed. The fact that a device is in good physical condition should not be a basis for deferring needed removal or change.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D11_para05">05</span><span class="support">Section 2A.02 contains information on excessive use of signs and other considerations that can reduce their effectiveness and the effectiveness of other traffic control devices.</span></p></span>

    <h3 id="section1D12">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.05</span><span class="text_added">1D.12</span> Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices</h3>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D12_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Functional maintenance of traffic control devices should be used to determine if certain devices need to be changed to meet current traffic conditions.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D12_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Physical maintenance of traffic control devices should be performed to retain the legibility and visibility of the device, and to retain the proper functioning of the device.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D12_para03">03</span><span class="support">Clean, legible, properly mounted devices in good working condition command the respect of road users.</span></p>

  </div>
</body>
</html>