<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 4P - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter <span class="text_deleted">4I</span><span class="text_added">4P</span>. Traffic Control Signals for Freeway Entrance Ramps</h1>

    <h3 id="section4P01">Section <span class="text_deleted">4I.01</span><span class="text_added">4P.01</span> Application of Freeway Entrance Ramp Control Signals</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Ramp control signals are traffic control signals that control the flow of traffic entering the freeway facility. This is often referred to as “ramp metering.”</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P01_para02">02</span><span class="support">Freeway entrance ramp control signals are sometimes used if controlling traffic entering the freeway could reduce the total expected delay to traffic in the freeway corridor, including freeway ramps and local streets.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P01_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The installation of ramp control signals should be preceded by an engineering study of the physical and traffic conditions on the highway facilities likely to be affected. The study should include the ramps and ramp connections and the surface streets that would be affected by the ramp control, as well as the freeway section concerned.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P01_para04">04</span><span class="support">Information on conditions that might justify freeway entrance ramp control signals, factors to be evaluated in traffic engineering studies for ramp control signals, design of ramp control signals, and operation of ramp control signals can be found in the FHWA’s “Ramp Management and Control Handbook” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>).</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4P02">Section 4I.02 Design of Freeway Entrance Ramp Control Signals<span class="note"> The sequence of paragraphs in this section was revised</span></h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Ramp control signals shall meet all of the standard design specifications for traffic control signals, except as otherwise provided in this Section.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para02">02</span><span class="standard">The signal face for freeway entrance ramp control signals shall be either a two-section signal face containing red and green signal indications or a three-section signal face containing red, yellow, and green signal indications.</span></p>

	 <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para03">03</span><span class="option">Ramp control signals may be placed in the dark mode (no indications displayed) when not in use.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para04">04</span><span class="option">Ramp control signals may be used to control some, but not all, lanes on a ramp, such as when non-metered HOV bypass lanes are provided on a ramp.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para05">05</span><span class="standard">If only one <span class="text_added">controlled </span>lane is present on an entrance ramp<span class="text_added">,</span> or if more than one <span class="text_added">controlled </span>lane is present on an entrance ramp and the ramp control signals are operated such that green signal indications are always displayed simultaneously to all of the <span class="text_added">controlled </span>lanes on the ramp, then a minimum of two signal faces per ramp shall face entering traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para06">06</span><span class="standard">If <span class="text_deleted">more than one lane is</span><span class="text_added">two controlled lanes are</span>  present on an entrance ramp and the ramp control signals are operated such that green signal indications are not always displayed simultaneously to <span class="text_deleted">all</span>both<span class="text_added"></span> of the <span class="text_added">controlled </span>lanes on the ramp, <span class="text_added">a minimum of two signal faces shall be provided for each of the two lanes</span><span class="text_deleted">then one signal face shall be provided over the approximate center of each separately-controlled lane</span>.</span><span class="note"> Added to reflect Official Interpretation 4(09)-29(I)</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para07">07</span><span class="standard">If three or more controlled lanes are present on an entrance ramp and the ramp control signals are operated such that green signal indications are not always displayed simultaneously to all of the controlled lanes on the ramp, then one signal face shall be provided over the approximate center of each separately-controlled lane.</span><span class="note"> Added to reflect Official Interpretation 4(09)-29(I)</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para08">08</span><span class="guidance">Additional side-mounted signal faces should be considered for ramps with <span class="text_deleted">two</span><span class="text_added">three</span> or more separately-controlled lanes.</span><span class="note"> Added to reflect Official Interpretation 4(09)-29(I)</span></p>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/><span class="text_deleted"><span class="paranum">09</span><span class="option">The required signal faces, if located at the side of the ramp roadway, may be mounted such that the height above the pavement grade at the center of the ramp roadway to the bottom of the signal housing of the lowest signal face is between 4.5 and 6 feet.</span></span><span class="note"> Text incorporated into the next paragraph</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para09">09</span><span class="option">For entrance ramps with only one controlled lane, the two required signal faces may both be mounted at the side of the roadway on a single pole<span class="text_added"> (as a specific exception to the normal 8-foot minimum lateral separation of signal faces as required by Section 4D.06)</span>, with <span class="text_deleted">one face at the normal mounting height and one</span><span class="text_added">the lower signal</span> face mounted <span class="text_added">installed at a minimum mounting height of 4.5 feet</span><span class="text_deleted">lower as provided in <a href="#section4P02_para09">Paragraph 9</a>, as a specific exception to the normal 8-foot minimum lateral separation of signal faces required by <a href="part4d.xhtml#section4D13">Section 4D.13.</a></span></span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para10">10</span><span class="option">For entrance ramps with two or more controlled lanes, if two signal facse are isntalled for the right-hand land or for the left-hand lane, the two signal faces for that lane may both be mounted at the closest side of the roadway on a single pole (as a specific exception to the normal 8-foot minimum lateral separation of signal faces required by Section 4D.06), with the lower signal face installed at a minimum mounting height of 4.5 feet.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span></span><span class="note"> Standard changed to Guidance</span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para11">11</span><span class="standard">Ramp control signals <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be located and designed to minimize their viewing by mainline freeway traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para12">12</span><span class="guidance">Regulatory signs with legends appropriate to the control, such as XX Vehicle(S) Per Green or XX VEHICLE(S) PER GREEN Each Lane (see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B66">Section 2B.<span class="text_added">66</span><span class="text_deleted">56</span></a>), should be installed adjacent<span class="text_deleted"> to the ramp control signal faces</span>.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para13">13</span><span class="guidance">When ramp control signals are installed on a freeway-to-freeway ramp, special consideration should be given to assuring adequate visibility of the ramp control signals, and multiple advance warning signs with flashing warning beacons should be installed to warn road users of the metered operation.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4P03">Section <span class="text_deleted">4I.03</span><span class="text_added">4P.03</span> Operation of Freeway Entrance Ramp Control Signals</h3>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P03_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Operational strategies for ramp control signals, such as periods of operation, metering rates and algorithms, and queue management, should be determined by the operating agency prior to the installation of the ramp control signals and should be closely monitored and adjusted as needed thereafter.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P03_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">When the ramp control signals are operated only during certain periods of the day, a RAMP METERED WHEN FLASHING (W3-8) sign (see <a href="part2c.xhtml#section2C39">Section 2C.<span class="text_added">39</span><span class="text_deleted">37</span></a>) should be installed in advance of the ramp control signal near the entrance to the ramp, or on the arterial on the approach to the ramp, to alert road users to the presence and operation of ramp meters.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">The RAMP METERED WHEN FLASHING sign shall be supplemented with a warning beacon (see <a href="part4s.xhtml#section4S03">Section <span class="text_deleted">4L.03</span><span class="text_added">4S.03</span></a>) that flashes when the ramp control signal is in operation.<span class="text_added"> Flashing light emitting diode (LED) units shall not be used within the legend or border of the sign to inform road users that the ramp control signal is in operation.</span></span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>