<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 3I - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter <span class="text_deleted">3H</span><span class="text_added">3I</span>. Channelizing Devices Used For Emphasis Of Pavement Marking Patterns</h1>

    <h3 id="section3I01">Section <span class="text_deleted">3H.01</span><span class="text_added">3I.01</span> Channelizing Devices</h3>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3I01_para01">01</span><span class="option">Channelizing devices<span class="text_deleted">, as described in </span><span class="text_added"> (see </span><a href="part6h.xhtml#section6F63">Sections 6F.63</a> through <a href="part6h.xhtml#section6F69">6F.<span class="text_deleted">73</span><span class="text_added">69</span></a><span class="text_deleted">, and <a href="part6h.xhtml#section6F75">6F.75</a>,</span> and <span class="text_deleted">as shown in </span><a href="../../#section6F07">Figure 6F-7</a><span class="text_added">)</span>, such as cones, tubular markers, vertical panels, <span class="text_added">and </span>drums, <span class="text_deleted">lane separators, and raised islands</span><span class="text_added">barricades</span>, may be used for general traffic control purposes such as adding emphasis to reversible lane delineation, channelizing lines, <span class="text_deleted">or </span>islands<span class="text_added">, or bicycle facilities</span>. Channelizing devices may also be used along a center line to preclude turns or along lane lines to preclude lane changing, as determined by engineering judgment.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3I01_para02">02</span><span class="support">Although they are not considered to be traffic control devices, raised islands (see Chapter 3J) are also sometimes used to channelize traffic.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3I01_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Except for color, the design of channelizing devices, including but not limited to retroreflectivity, minimum dimensions, and mounting height, shall comply with the provisions of <a href="part6f.xhtml">Chapter <span class="text_deleted">6F</span><span class="text_added">6K</span></a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3I01_para04">04</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">T</span><span class="text_added">Except as provided in Paragraph 5, t</span>he color of channelizing devices used outside of temporary traffic control zones shall be <span class="text_deleted">either orange or </span>the same color as the pavement marking that they supplement, or for which they are substituted<span class="text_added">, in accordance with Section 3A.05</span>.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3I01_para05">05</span><span class="option">The color of channelizing devices used to emphasize pavement marking patterns outside of temporary traffic control zones may be orange provided that the application of the orange-colored channelizing device is not permanent.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3I01_para06">06</span><span class="support">Emergency incidents and planned special events are the most common temporary traffic control zones that would justify orange channelizing devices to emphasize standard pavement marking colors. These events do not necessitate police officers or other authorized personnel to obtain and deploy channelizing devices that match the color of the existing pavement marking.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3I01_para07">07</span><span class="standard">For nighttime use, channelizing devices shall be retroreflective (as described in <a href="part6_toc.html">Part 6</a>) or internally illuminated. On channelizing devices used outside of temporary traffic control zones, retroreflective sheeting or bands shall be white if the devices separate traffic flows in the same direction and shall be yellow if the devices separate traffic flows in the opposite direction or are placed along the left-hand edge line of a one-way roadway or ramp. </span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">Channelizing devices should be kept clean and bright to maximize target value.</span> <span class="change_noted">Not needed</span></p></span>

	<span class="text_added">
	<h3 id="section3I02">Section 3I.02 Tubular Markers</h3>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3I02_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Tubular markers shall be made with a material that can be struck without causing damage to the impacting vehicle. Tubular markers shall be a minimum of 28 inches in height and shall be a minimum of 2 inches wide facing road users.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3I02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Tubular markers should be affixed to the pavement or other surface either directly or by means of an attachment system that is affixed to the pavement or other surface. Tubular markers should be normally spaced no greater than N as cited in Section 3B.11.</span></p>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3I02_para03">03</span><span class="option">Other spacing may be used based on engineering judgment.</span></p>
	</span>
  </div>
</body>
</html>