<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 5A - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content" class="text_added">
    <h1>Chapter 5A. General</h1>

    <h3 id="section5A01">Section 5A.01 Purpose and Scope</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A01_para01">01</span><span class="support">The purpose of this Chapter is to provide agencies with general considerations for vehicle automation as they assess their infrastructure needs, prepare their roadways for automated vehicle (AV) technologies, and to support the safe deployment of automated vehicle technology.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A01_para02">02</span><span class="support">This Chapter provides an overview of foundational AV technology terminology, key principles, considerations for traffic control device selection, and topics for agencies to consider. The MUTCD does not address standardizing several areas that might be important to AV technologies such as digital infrastructure, geometric road design, setting maintenance levels for all traffic control devices, and setting minimum condition levels for paving materials.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A01_para03">03</span><span class="support">It is important for early implementers of automated vehicles to understand the ramifications of traffic control devices in a mixed fleet environment and to consider the needs of both human and machine led road users. Partial automation technologies are already commercially available in the vehicle fleet and are operating under current infrastructure conditions. The overall effectiveness of the automation is impacted by the uniformity and consistent application of the highway infrastructure, including traffic control devices.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section5A02">Section 5A.02 Overview of Connected and Automated Vehicles</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A02_para01">01</span><span class="support">Connected vehicle technology enables cars, buses, trucks, trains, roads and roadside infrastructure, as well as other devices such as cellular telephones, to communicate with one another. This technology enables every vehicle on the road to be aware of where other nearby vehicles are. Drivers would receive notifications and alerts of dangerous situations, such as a vehicle about to run a red traffic signal as it nears an intersection or an oncoming car, out of sight beyond a curve, swerving into the opposing lane to avoid an object on the road.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A02_para02">02</span><span class="support">AV technology automates some or all aspects of the driving tasks to assist or replace the human vehicle operator. Automated vehicle features may include adaptive cruise control, adaptive headlights, automatic emergency braking, lane tracking assist, or other technology based features used to control some or all aspects of the vehicle. AVs are vehicles in which at least one element of vehicle control (e.g. steering, speed control, braking) occurs without direct driver input. AVs work by gathering information from a suite of sensors:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="support">
	<li>Cameras;</li>
	<li>Radar;</li>
	<li>Light detection and ranging (LiDAR);</li>
	<li>Ultrasonic; and</li>
	<li>Infrared.</li>
	</ol>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A02_para03">03</span><span class="support">AVs may combine sensor data with other inputs including detailed map data and information from other connected vehicles or infrastructure. AVs may be able to detect and classify objects in their surroundings and may predict how they are likely to behave.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section5A03">Section 5A.03 Definitions and Terms</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A03_para01">01</span><span class="support">The following definitions and terms, found in the Society of Automotive Engineers standard SAE J3016 and other sources, are used extensively in automated vehicle technology. Their definitions are summarized for reference and for use with the provisions of this Manual:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="support">
	<li>Automated Driving Systems (ADS) - The hardware and software that are collectively capable of
performing the entire dynamic driving task (DDT) on a sustained basis, regardless of whether it is limited to a specific operational design domain (ODD); this term is used specifically to describe a level 3, 4, or 5 driving automation system (DAS).</li>
	<li>Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) – are electronic systems that aid a vehicle driver with one or more driving tasks while driving. They are intended to increase safe operation of a vehicle and includes applications such as automatic braking, lane keep assistance, adaptive cruise control, and others.</li>
	<li>Automation levels:
	<ol type="1" class="support">
		<li>Level 0 - The full-time performance by the human driver of all aspects of the DDT, even when enhanced by warning or intervention systems.</li>
		<li>Level 1 - The driving mode specific execution by a driver assistance system of either steering or acceleration/deceleration using information about the driving environment and with the expectation that the human driver performs all remaining aspects of the DDT.</li>
		<li>Level 2 - The driving mode specific execution by one or more driver assistance systems of both steering or acceleration/deceleration using information about the driving environment and with the expectation that the human driver performs all remaining aspects of the DDT.</li>
		<li>Level 3 - The driving mode specific performance by an ADS of all aspects of the DDT with the expectation that the human driver will respond appropriately to a request to intervene.</li>
		<li>Level 4 - The driving mode specific performance by an ADS of all aspects of the DDT, even if a human driver does not respond appropriately to a request to intervene.</li>
		<li>Level 5 - The full-time performance by an ADS of all aspects of the DDT under all roadway and environmental conditions that can be managed by a human driver.</li>
	</ol>
	</li>
	<li>Cooperative Automation – technology that enables communication with other vehicles and the infrastructure to coordinate automated vehicle operation.</li>
	<li>DAS - The hardware and software that are collectively capable of performing part or all of the DDT on a sustained basis; this term is used generically to describe any system capable of level 1-5 driving automation.</li>
	<li>DDT - All of the real-time operational and tactical functions required to operate a vehicle in on road traffic, excluding the strategic functions such as trip scheduling and selection of destinations and waypoints.</li>
	<li>ODD - Operating conditions under which a given DAS or feature thereof is specifically designed to function, including, but not limited to, environmental, geographical, and time-of-day restrictions, and/or the requisite presence or absence of certain traffic or roadway characteristics.</li>
	</ol>

	<h3 id="section5A04">Section 5A.04 Traffic Control Device Design and Use Considerations</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para01">01</span><span class="support">The interaction of traffic control devices with DAS can create many challenges for agencies in determining traffic control device selection and application. The lack of tolerance of DAS for non-uniformity in traffic control device design and application is a limiting factor of current DAS sophistication, i.e. DAS has limited ability to interpolate across gaps in traffic control device cues to the vehicle in the following situations:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="support">
		<li>The DAS technologies ability to adapt to existing traffic control device design and typical quality, e.g. the refresh rates of electronic changeable message sign displays or the overall quality of a device that has been out on the roadway for many years;</li>
		<li>The color perception of signs;</li>
		<li>The electronically perceptible conspicuity and contrast of markings in different environments and lighting conditions;</li>
		<li>The DAS camera technologies 1 and device photometric characteristics in reading various types of traffic signals</li>
		<li>The ability to discern and comprehend temporary traffic control devices and their varying applications, e.g. active electronic display devices, flaggers, etc.;</li>
		<li>The ability to decipher traffic control at rail grade crossings, especially with passive control.</li>
	</ol>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para02">02</span><span class="support">These and other challenges might limit the functionality of DAS making them less effective or functional. The uniform design and consistent application of standardized traffic control devices supports the functionality of DAS technology in many situations. Similarly, good traffic control device maintenance practices and programs will help improve the potential for vehicle DAS to operate properly in many roadway environments.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Agencies should adopt traffic control device maintenance policies and or practices with consideration to both the human vehicle operator and DAS technology needs (see <a href ="part1a.xhtml#section1A12">Sections 1A.12</a>, <a href ="part2a.xhtml#section2A18">2A.18</a>, <a href ="part3a.xhtml#section3A05">3A.05</a> and <a href ="part4a.xhtml#section4A10">4A.10</a> of this Manual).</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Engineering judgment (see <a href ="part1d.xhtml#section1D03">Section 1D.03</a> of this Manual) used to determine traffic control device selection and placement should consider uniformity in application and location needed to support both the human vehicle operator and DAS technology.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para05">05</span><span class="support">A systematic approach to traffic control device selection, application, and maintenance taking into consideration certain fundamental principles, will help agencies considering the inclusion of DAS vehicles on their roadways. Generally, improvements to traffic control device uniformity and improved maintenance policies and practices that keep traffic control devices in good working order with high levels of conspicuity that benefit the human vehicle operator will benefit DAS vehicles as well.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Agencies should apply the following fundamental principles and considerations as they evaluate traffic control devices and other maintenance practices to support AV technologies during maintenance and infrastructure improvements:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
	<li>The uniform and consistent application of traffic control devices on each type of roadway; applying a similar approach to traffic control at similar locations in similar situations.</li>
	<li>Established maintenance policies that incorporate effective practices to ensure the clear message intended to the road user on traffic control devices reaching the end of their useful life, or are damaged or otherwise no longer serviceable, be identified, fixed or replaced in a timely manner.</li>
	<li>Temporary or emergency traffic control, to the extent practical, is planned in advance using devices that comply with the provisions of this Manual and following policies designed to ensure uniformity throughout the site and across jurisdiction.</li>
	<li>Removal of extraneous devices that are no longer necessary or that provide limited benefit to vehicle operation or navigation.</li>
	</ol>


  </div>
</body>
</html>