<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 6A - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 6A. General</h1>

    <h3 id="section6A01">Section 6A.01 General</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Whenever the acronym “TTC” is used in <a href="part6_toc.html">Part 6</a>, it refers to “temporary traffic control.”</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para02">02</span><span class="standard">The needs and control of all road users (motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians within the highway, or on <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways</span> open to public travel (see definition in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.02</span></a>), including persons with disabilities in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), Title II<span class="text_deleted">, Paragraph 35.130</span>) through a TTC zone shall be an essential part of highway construction, utility work, maintenance operations, and the management of traffic incidents. </span><span class="change_noted">Edited to improve consistency</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para03">03</span><span class="support">When the normal function of the roadway, or a <span class="text_deleted">private road</span><span class="text_added">site roadway</span> open to public travel, is suspended, TTC planning provides for continuity of the movement of motor vehicle, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic (including accessible passage); transit operations; and access (and accessibility) to property and utilities.</span><span class="change_noted">Edited to improve consistency</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para04">04</span><span class="support">The primary function of TTC is to <span class="text_deleted">provide for the reasonably safe and effective</span><span class="text_added">facilitate</span> movement of road users through or around TTC zones while <span class="text_deleted">reasonably </span>protecting road users, workers, responders to traffic incidents, and equipment.</span><span class="change_noted">Edited to improve consistency</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para05">05</span><span class="support">Of equal importance to the public traveling through the TTC zone is the safety of workers performing the many varied tasks within the work space. TTC zones present constantly changing conditions that are unexpected by the road user. This creates an even higher degree of vulnerability for the workers and incident management responders on or near the roadway (see <a href="part6b.xhtml#section6D04">Section <span class="text_deleted">6D.03</span><span class="text_added">6C.04</span></a>). At the same time, the TTC zone provides for the efficient completion of whatever activity interrupted the normal use of the roadway.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para06">06</span><span class="support">Consideration for road user safety, worker and responder safety, and the efficiency of road user flow is an integral element of every TTC zone, from planning through completion. A concurrent objective of the TTC is the efficient construction and maintenance of the highway and the efficient resolution of traffic incidents.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para07">07</span><span class="support">No one set of TTC devices can satisfy all conditions for a given project or incident. At the same time, defining details that would be adequate to cover all applications is not practical. Instead, <a href="part6_toc.html">Part 6</a> displays typical applications that depict common applications of TTC devices. The TTC selected for each situation depends on type of highway, road user conditions, duration of operation, physical constraints, and the nearness of the work space or incident management activity to road users.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para08">08</span><span class="support">The temporary traffic control for low-volume rural and special purpose roads will generally be minimal, recognizing the lower speeds and traffic volumes. A limited number of signs, maintenance vehicle warning flashers, or a single flagger could be adequate for most situations.</span><span class="change_noted">Added due to elimination of Part 5</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para09">09</span><span class="support">Improved road user performance might be realized through a well-prepared public relations effort that covers the nature of the work, the time and duration of its execution, the anticipated effects upon road users, and possible alternate routes and modes of travel. Such programs have been found to result in a significant reduction in the number of road users traveling through the TTC zone, which reduces the possible number of conflicts.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para10">10</span><span class="support">Operational improvements might be realized by using intelligent transportation systems (ITS) in work zones. The use in work zones of ITS technology, such as portable camera systems, highway advisory radio, variable speed limits, ramp metering, traveler information, merge guidance, <span class="text_added">warning systems for vehicles exiting the work space </span>and queue detection information, is aimed at increasing safety for both workers and road users and helping to ensure a more efficient traffic flow. The use in work zones of ITS technologies has been found to be effective in providing traffic monitoring and management, data collection, and traveler information.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para11">11</span><span class="standard">TTC plans and devices shall be the responsibility of the <span class="text_deleted">authority of a </span>public body or official <span class="text_added">or the owners of site roadways open to public travel </span>having jurisdiction for guiding road users.</span><span class="change_noted">Edited to improve consistency</span></p>

	<p><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span></span><span class="change_noted">Standard changed to Guidance</span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para12">12</span><span class="guidance">There <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be adequate statutory authority for the implementation and enforcement of needed road user regulations, parking controls, speed zoning, and the management of traffic incidents. Such statutes <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> provide sufficient flexibility in the application of TTC to meet the needs of changing conditions in the TTC zone.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Temporary facilities, including pedestrian routes around worksites, are also covered by the accessibility requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) (Public Law 101-336, 104 Stat. 327, July 26, 1990. 42 U.S.C. 12101-12213 (as amended)).</span><span class="change_noted">Deleted; redundant with Standard statement above</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para13">13</span><span class="support">The provisions of Part 6 apply to both rural and urban areas. A rural highway is normally characterized by lower volumes, higher speeds, fewer turning conflicts, and less conflict with pedestrians. An urban street is typically characterized by relatively low speeds, wide ranges of road user volumes, narrower roadway lanes, frequent intersections and driveways, significant pedestrian activity, and more businesses and houses.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para14">14</span><span class="support">The determination as to whether a particular facility at a particular time of day can be considered to be a high-volume roadway or can be considered to be a low-volume roadway is made by the public agency or official having jurisdiction.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para15">15</span><span class="support">Special plans preparation and coordination with transit, other highway agencies, law enforcement and other emergency units, utilities, schools, <span class="text_added">trucking associations </span>and railroad companies might be needed to reduce unexpected and unusual road user operation situations.</span><span class="change_noted">This text was relocated from existing Section 6B.01</span></p>

	<h3 id="section6A02">Section <span class="text_deleted">6B.01</span><span class="text_added">6A.02</span> Fundamental Principles of Temporary Traffic Control</h3>

    <span class="text_deleted">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Construction, maintenance, utility, and incident zones can all benefit from TTC to compensate for the unexpected or unusual situations faced by road users. When planning for TTC in these zones, it can be assumed that it is appropriate for road users to exercise caution. Even though road users are assumed to be using caution, special care is still needed in applying TTC techniques.</span><span class="change_noted">Deleted; redundant with new Part 1 language on target road users</span></p> 

    
	</span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A02_para01">01</span><span class="support">Experience has shown that following the fundamental principles of Part 6 will assist road users and help protect workers in the vicinity of TTC zones.</span></p>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard">Before any new detour or temporary route is opened to traffic, all necessary signs shall be in place.</span></span><span class="change_noted">Relocated from below and deleted; redundant with new Standard in new Section 1D.11</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A02_para02">02</span><span class="standard">All TTC devices shall be removed as soon as practical when they are no longer needed. When work is suspended for short periods of time, TTC devices that are no longer appropriate shall be removed or covered.</span><span class="change_noted">Relocated from below</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A02_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Road user and worker safety and accessibility in TTC zones should be an integral and high-priority element of every project from planning through design and construction. Similarly, maintenance and utility work should be planned and conducted with the safety and accessibility of all motorists, bicyclists, pedestrians (including those with disabilities), and workers being considered at all times. If the TTC zone includes a grade crossing, early coordination with the railroad company or light rail transit agency should take place.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6A02_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">The following are the seven fundamental principles of TTC:</span></p>

    <ol class="guidance">
      <li>General plans or guidelines should be developed to provide safety for motorists, bicyclists, pedestrians, workers, enforcement/emergency officials, and equipment, with the following factors being considered: 

      <ol type="A">
        <li>The basic safety principles governing the design of permanent roadways and roadsides should also govern the design of TTC zones. The goal should be to route road users through such zones using roadway geometrics, roadside features, and TTC devices as nearly as possible comparable to those for normal highway situations.</li>

        <li>A TTC plan, in detail appropriate to the complexity of the work project or incident, should be prepared and understood by all responsible parties before the site is occupied. Any changes in the TTC plan should be approved by an official who is knowledgeable (for example, trained and/or certified) in proper TTC practices.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Road user movement should be inhibited as little as practical, based on the following considerations: 

      <ol type="A">
        <li>TTC at work and incident sites should be designed on the assumption that drivers will only reduce their speeds if they clearly perceive a need to do so (see <a href="part6b.xhtml#section6B01">Section 6<span class="text_deleted">C</span><span class="text_added">B</span>.01</a>).</li>

        <li>Frequent and abrupt changes in geometrics such as lane narrowing, dropped lanes, or main roadway transitions that require rapid maneuvers, should be avoided.</li>

        <li>Work should be scheduled in a manner that minimizes the need for lane closures or alternate routes, while still getting the work completed quickly and the lanes or roadway open to traffic as soon as possible.</li>

        <li>Attempts should be made to reduce the volume of traffic using the roadway or freeway to match the restricted capacity conditions. Road users should be encouraged to use alternative routes. <span class="text_added">When the roadway capacity is reduced due to the lane closure, the demand will exceed the available capacity and result in either a lengthy stopped or slow moving queue of vehicles that may extend past the normal signs shown in the typical advance warning area. An assessment of the expected queue length should be a part of the temporary traffic control plan design process and adjustments to the sign spacing and number of signs as well as the possibility of using more conspicuous devices may be provided to increase the distance and conspicuity of the advance warning area. </span><span class="change_noted">Added to reflect NTSB H-15-16 recommendation</span>For high-volume roadways and freeways, the closure of selected entrance ramps or other access points and the use of signed diversion routes should be evaluated.</li>

        <li>Bicyclists and pedestrians, including those with disabilities, should be provided with access and <span class="text_deleted">reasonably safe </span>passage through the TTC zone.</li>

        <li>If work operations permit, lane closures on high-volume streets and highways should be scheduled during off-peak hours. Night work should be considered if the work can be accomplished with a series of short-term operations.</li>

        <li>Early coordination with officials having jurisdiction over the affected cross streets and providing emergency services should occur if significant impacts to roadway operations are anticipated.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians should be guided in a clear and positive manner while approaching and traversing TTC zones and incident sites. The following principles should be applied: 

      <ol type="A">
        <li>Adequate warning, delineation, and channelization should be provided to assist in guiding road users in advance of and through the TTC zone or incident site by using proper pavement marking, signing, or other devices that are effective under varying conditions. <span class="text_deleted">Providing i</span><span class="text_added">I</span>nformation <span class="text_deleted">that is in</span><span class="text_added">should be provided in</span> usable formats <span class="text_deleted">by</span><span class="text_added">for</span> pedestrians with visual disabilities<span class="text_deleted"> should also be considered</span>.<span class="change_noted">Edited to reflect 28 CFR 36.160 (subpart a)</span></li>

        <li>TTC devices inconsistent with intended travel paths through TTC zones should be removed or covered. However, in intermediate-term stationary, short-term, and mobile operations, where visible permanent devices are inconsistent with intended travel paths, devices that highlight or emphasize the appropriate path should be used. <span class="text_deleted">Providing t</span><span class="text_added">T</span>raffic control devices <span class="text_deleted">that are accessible to and usable by pedestrians with disabilities should be considered</span><span class="text_added">should provide information in usable formats for pedestrians with visual disabilities</span>.<span class="change_noted">Edited to reflect 28 CFR 35.160 (subpart a)</span></li>

        <li>Flagging procedures, when used, should provide positive guidance to road users traversing the TTC zone.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>To provide acceptable levels of operations, routine day and night inspections of TTC elements should be performed as follows: 

      <ol type="A">
        <li>Individuals who are knowledgeable (for example, trained and/or certified) in the principles of proper TTC should be assigned responsibility for safety in TTC zones. The most important duty of these individuals <span class="text_deleted">should be</span><span class="text_added">is</span> to check that <span class="text_deleted">all </span>TTC devices <span class="text_deleted">of</span><span class="text_added">on</span> the project are consistent with the TTC plan and are effective for motorists, bicyclists, pedestrians, and workers.<span class="change_noted">Edited to improve consistency</span></li>

        <li>As the work progresses, temporary traffic controls and/or working conditions should be modified, <span class="text_deleted">if appropriate</span><span class="text_added">as needed</span>, <span class="text_deleted">in order </span>to <span class="text_deleted">provide mobility and positive guidance to the</span><span class="text_added">facilitate</span> road user <span class="text_added">movement </span>and <span class="text_deleted">to </span>provide worker safety. The individual responsible for TTC should have the authority to halt work until applicable or remedial safety measures are taken.<span class="change_noted">Edited to improve consistency</span></li>

        <li>TTC zones should be carefully monitored under varying conditions of road user volumes, light, and weather to check that applicable TTC devices are effective, clearly visible, clean, and in compliance with the TTC plan.</li>

        <li>When warranted, an engineering study should be made (in cooperation with law enforcement officials) of reported crashes occurring within the TTC zone. Crash records in TTC zones should be monitored to identify the need for changes in the TTC zone.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Attention should be given to the maintenance of roadside safety during the life of the TTC zone by applying the following principles: 

      <ol type="A">
        <li>To accommodate run-off-the-road incidents, disabled vehicles, or emergency situations, unencumbered roadside recovery areas or clear zones should be provided where practical.</li>

        <li>Channelization of road users should be accomplished by the use of pavement markings, signing, and crashworthy, detectable channelizing devices.</li>

        <li>Work equipment, workers’ private vehicles, materials, and debris should be stored in such a manner to reduce the probability of being impacted by run-off-the-road vehicles.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Each person whose actions affect TTC zone safety, from the upper-level management through the field workers, should receive training appropriate to the job decisions each individual is required to make. Only those individuals who are trained in proper TTC practices and have a basic understanding of the principles (established by applicable standards and guidelines, including those of this Manual) should supervise the selection, placement, and maintenance of TTC devices used for TTC zones and for incident management.</li>

      <li>Good public relations should be maintained by applying the following principles: 

      <ol type="A">
        <li>The needs of all road users should be assessed such that appropriate advance notice is given and clearly defined alternative paths are provided.</li>

        <li>The cooperation of the various news media should be sought in publicizing the existence of and reasons for TTC zones because news releases can assist in keeping the road users well informed.</li>

        <li>The needs of abutting property owners, residents, and businesses should be assessed and appropriate accommodations made.</li>

        <li>The needs of emergency service providers (law enforcement, fire, and medical) should be assessed and appropriate coordination and accommodations made.</li>

        <li>The needs of railroads and transit should be assessed and appropriate coordination and accommodations made.</li>

        <li>The needs of operators of commercial vehicles such as buses and large trucks should be assessed and appropriate accommodations made.</li>
      </ol></li>
    </ol>

    <h3 id="section6A03">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.01</span><span class="text_added">6A.03</span> <span class="text_deleted">Types of</span><span class="text_added">TTC</span> Devices</h3>
<span class="change_noted">New Section with paragraphs from existing Section 6F.01 and section title changed</span>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A03_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">The design and application of TTC devices used in TTC zones should consider the needs of all road users (motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians), including those with disabilities.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A03_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Traffic control devices shall be defined as all signs, signals, markings, <span class="text_added">channelizing devices, or</span><span class="text_deleted">and</span> other devices <span class="text_added">that </span>use<span class="text_deleted">d</span><span class="text_added"> colors, shapes, symbols, words, sounds, or tactile information for the primary purpose of communicating a</span> <span class="text_deleted">to </span>regulat<span class="text_deleted">e</span><span class="text_added">ory</span>, warn<span class="text_added">ing</span>, or guid<span class="text_deleted">e</span><span class="text_added">ance message to</span> road users<span class="text_deleted">, placed</span> on<span class="text_deleted">, over, or adjacent to</span> a street, highway, <span class="text_added">pedestrian facility, bikeway, pathway, or </span><span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways</span> open to public travel<span class="text_deleted"> (see definition in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A13">Section 1A.13</a>), pedestrian facility, or bikeway by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction</span>.</span><span class="change_noted">Revised for consistency with revised definition in Part 1.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">All traffic control devices used for construction, maintenance, utility, or incident management operations on a street, highway, or <span class="text_deleted">private road</span><span class="text_added">site roadways</span> open to public travel <span class="text_deleted">(see definition in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A13">Section 1A.13</a>) </span>shall comply with the applicable provisions of this Manual.</span><span class="change_noted">Edited to improve consistency</span></p>

	<span class="text_added"><h3 id="section6A04">Section 6A.04 Crashworthiness of TTC Devices</h3></span><span class="change_noted">New Section with paragraphs from existing Section 6F.01</span>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="text_deleted"><span class="support">FHWA policy requires that all roadside appurtenances such as traffic barriers, barrier terminals and crash cushions, bridge railings, sign and light pole supports, and work zone hardware used on the National Highway System meet the crashworthy performance criteria contained in the National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) Report 350, “Recommended Procedures for the Safety Performance Evaluation of Highway Features.” The FHWA website at “http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/programs/roadside_hardware.htm” identifies all such hardware and includes copies of FHWA acceptance letters for each of them. In the case of proprietary items, links are provided to manufacturers’ websites as a source of detailed information on specific devices. The website also contains an “Ask the Experts” section where questions on roadside design issues can be addressed.</span></span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6A04_para01">01</span><span class="support">Various Sections of the MUTCD require certain traffic control devices, their supports, and/or related appurtenances to be crashworthy. Such MUTCD crashworthiness provisions apply to all streets, highways, and <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways</span> open to public travel.<span class="text_deleted"> Also, State Departments of Transportation and local agencies might have expanded the NCHRP Report 350 crashworthy criteria to apply to certain other roadside appurtenances.</span></span></p>

	<span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support">Crashworthiness and crash testing information on devices described in Part 6 are found in AASHTO’s “Roadside Design Guide” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>).</span></p>

    <p><span class="support">As defined in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A13">Section 1A.13</a>, “crashworthy” is a characteristic of a roadside appurtenance that has been successfully crash tested in accordance with a national standard such as the NCHRP Report 350, “Recommended Procedures for the Safety Performance Evaluation of Highway Features.”</span></p></span>

	<span class="text_added"><h3 id="section6A05">Section 6A.05 Night Work</h3></span><span class="change_noted">New Section with paragraphs 2-5 from existing Section 6G.19</span>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6A05_para01">01</span><span class="support">Conducting highway construction and maintenance activities during night hours could provide an advantage when traditional daytime traffic control strategies cannot achieve an acceptable balance between worker and public safety, traffic and community impact, and constructability. The two basic advantages of working at night are reduced traffic congestion and less involvement with business activities. However, the two basic conditions that must normally be met for night work to offer any advantage are reduced traffic volumes and easy set up and removal of the traffic control patterns on a nightly basis.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A05_para02">02</span><span class="support">Shifting work activities to night hours, when traffic volumes are lower and normal business is less active, might offer an advantage in some cases, as long as the necessary work can be completed and the worksite restored to essentially normal operating conditions to carry the higher traffic volume during non-construction hours.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A05_para03">03</span><span class="support">Although working at night might offer advantages, it also includes safety issues. Reduced visibility inherent in night work impacts the performance of both drivers and workers. Because traffic volumes are lower and congestion is minimized, speeds are often higher at night necessitating greater visibility at a time when visibility is reduced. Finally, the incidence of impaired (alcohol or drugs), fatigued, or drowsy drivers might be higher at night.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A05_para04">04</span><span class="support">Working at night also involves other factors, including construction productivity and quality, social impacts, economics, and environmental issues. A decision to perform construction or maintenance activities at night normally involves some consideration of the advantages to be gained compared to the safety and other issues that might be impacted.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6A05_para05">05</span><span class="support">See <a href="part6n.xhtml#section6N18">Section 6N.18</a> for specific provisions on TTC for work during nighttime hours.</span><span class="change_noted">Added to reflect reorganization of material between Section 6A.05 and 6N.18</span></p>
	</span>

	<span class="text_deleted"><h1>Chapter 6B. Fundamental Principles</h1></span><span class="change_noted">This chapter and most of its text has been moved to new Section 6A.02</span>
  </div>
</body>
</html>