<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 4R - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter <span class="text_deleted">4K</span><span class="text_added">4R</span>. Highway Traffic Signals at Toll Plazas</h1>

    <h3 id="section4R01">Section <span class="text_deleted">4K.01</span><span class="text_added">4R.01</span> Traffic Signals at Toll Plazas</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4R01_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Traffic control signals or devices that closely resemble traffic control signals that use red or green circular indications shall not be used at toll plazas to indicate the open or closed status of the toll plaza lanes.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4R01_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Traffic control signals or devices that closely resemble traffic control signals that use red or green circular indications should not be used for new or reconstructed installations at toll plazas to indicate the success or failure of electronic toll payments or to alternately direct drivers making cash toll payments to stop and then proceed.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4R02">Section <span class="text_deleted">4K.02</span><span class="text_added">4R.02</span> Lane-Use Control Signals at or Near Toll Plazas</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4R02_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Lane-use control signals used at toll plazas shall comply with the provisions of <a href="part4t.xhtml">Chapter <span class="text_deleted">4M</span><span class="text_added">4T</span></a> except as otherwise provided in this Section.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4R02_para02">02</span><span class="standard">At toll plazas with multiple lanes where one or more lanes is sometimes closed to traffic, a lane-use control signal shall be installed above the center of each toll plaza lane to indicate the open or closed status of the controlled lane.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4R02_para03">03</span><span class="option">The bottom of the signal housing of a lane-use control signal above a toll plaza lane having a canopy may be mounted lower than 15 feet above the pavement, but not lower than the vertical clearance of the canopy structure.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4R02_para04">04</span><span class="option">Lane-use control signals may also be used to indicate the open or closed status of an Open-Road ETC lane as a supplement to other devices used for the temporary closure of a lane (see <a href="part6_toc.html">Part 6</a>).</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4R03">Section <span class="text_deleted">4K.03</span><span class="text_added">4R.03</span> Warning Beacons at Toll Plazas</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4R03_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Warning Beacons used at toll plazas shall comply with the provisions of <a href="part4s.xhtml">Chapter <span class="text_deleted">4L</span><span class="text_added">4S</span></a> except as otherwise provided in this Section.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4R03_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Warning Beacons, if used with a toll plaza canopy sign (see <a href="part2f.xhtml#section2F16">Section 2F.16</a>) to assist drivers of such vehicles in locating the dedicated ETC Account-Only lane(s), should be installed in a manner such that the beacons are distinctly separate from the lane-use control signals (see <a href="part4t.xhtml#section4T01">Section 4<span class="text_deleted">M</span><span class="text_added">T</span>.01</a>) for the toll plaza lane.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4R03_para03">03</span><span class="option">Warning Beacons that are mounted on toll plaza islands, behind impact attenuators in front of toll plaza islands, and/or on toll booth pylons (ramparts) to identify them as objects in the roadway may be mounted at a height that is appropriate for viewing in a toll plaza context, even if that height is lower than the normal minimum of 8 feet above the pavement. </span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>