<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 6C - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
	
    <h1>Chapter <span class="text_deleted">6D</span><span class="text_added">6C</span>. Pedestrian and Worker Safety</h1>

	<span class="text_added">
	<h3 id="section6C01">Section 6C.01 Pedestrian and Worker Safety -- General</h3>
	</span>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C01_para01">01</span><span class="standard">The various TTC provisions for pedestrian and worker safety set forth in <a href="part6_toc.html">Part 6</a> shall be applied by knowledgeable (for example, trained and/or certified) persons after appropriate evaluation and engineering judgment.</span><span class="change_noted">This text was relocated from existing Section 6D.01</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6C02">Section <span class="text_deleted">6D.01</span><span class="text_added">6C.02</span> Pedestrian Considerations</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para01">01</span><span class="support">A wide range of pedestrians might be affected by TTC zones, including the young, elderly, and people with disabilities such as hearing, visual, or mobility. <span class="text_deleted">These p</span><span class="text_added">P</span>edestrians need a clearly delineated and usable travel path. Considerations for pedestrians with disabilities are addressed in <a href="#section6C03">Section <span class="text_deleted">6D.02</span><span class="text_added">6C.03</span></a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><span class="change_noted">Standard changed to Guidance and edited to improve consistency</span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted">Advance notification of</span><span class="text_added">Prior to closing a</span> sidewalk<span class="text_added">,</span><span class="text_deleted"> closures shall be provided by</span> the maintaining agency<span class="text_added"> should advise users of the future closure</span>. </span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para03">03</span><span class="standard">If the TTC zone affects the movement of pedestrians, adequate pedestrian access and walkways shall be provided.<span class="text_deleted"> If the TTC zone affects an accessible and detectable pedestrian facility, the accessibility and detectability shall be maintained along the alternate pedestrian route.</span></span><span class="change_noted">Deleted; redundant with new Section 6N.04</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para04">04</span><span class="option">If establishing or maintaining an alternate pedestrian route is not feasible during the project, an alternate means of providing for pedestrians may be used, such as adding free bus service around the project or assigning someone the responsibility to assist pedestrians with disabilities through the project limits.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para05">05</span><span class="option">If an existing pedestrian route is impacted by a short-duration or short term work zone that is attended with project personnel, establishing an alternate pedestrian route may not be necessary if the work can be stopped and pedestrians can navigate the work zone. Pedestrians may be delayed for a short period of time for project personnel to move equipment and material to facilitate passage. Work zone personnel may also provide assistance to the pedestrian as necessary.</span><span class="change_noted">Added to improve consistency</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para06">06</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted">It must be recognized that p</span><span class="text_added">P</span>edestrians are reluctant to retrace their steps to a prior intersection for a crossing or to add distance or out-of-the-way travel to a destination.<span class="change_noted">Edited to improve accuracy</span> This is especially true for site roadways open to public travel where pedestrians will seek the shortest route, e.g. from a site building to their parked vehicle.<span class="change_noted">Added to improve consistency</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">The following three items should be considered when planning for pedestrians in TTC zones:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>Pedestrians should not be led into conflicts with vehicles, equipment, and operations.</li>

      <li>Pedestrians should not be led into conflicts with vehicles moving through or around the worksite.</li>

      <li>Pedestrians should be provided with a convenient and accessible path that replicates as nearly as practical the most desirable characteristics of the existing sidewalk(s) or footpath(s).</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para08">08</span><span class="guidance">A pedestrian route should not be severed and/or moved for non-construction activities such as parking for vehicles and equipment.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para09">09</span><span class="guidance">Consideration should be made to separate pedestrian movements from both worksite activity and vehicular traffic. Unless an acceptable route that does not involve crossing the roadway can be provided, pedestrians should be appropriately directed with advance signing that encourages them to cross to the opposite side of the roadway. In urban and suburban areas with high vehicular traffic volumes, these signs should be placed at intersections (rather than midblock locations) so that pedestrians are not confronted with midblock worksites that will induce them to attempt skirting the worksite or making a midblock crossing.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para10">10</span><span class="guidance">Due to the likelihood of high pedestrian presence in site roadways open to public travel, TTC zones should be designed to minimize conflicts between vehicular and pedestrian movements.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para11">11</span><span class="support"><a href="part6p.xhtml#figure6P28">Figures 6<span class="text_deleted">H</span><span class="text_added">P</span>-28</a> and <a href="part6p.xhtml#figure6P29">6<span class="text_deleted">H</span><span class="text_added">P</span>-29</a> show typical TTC device usage and techniques for pedestrian movement through work zones.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para12">12</span><span class="guidance">To accommodate the needs of pedestrians, including those with disabilities, the following considerations should be addressed when temporary pedestrian pathways in TTC zones are designed or modified:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>Provisions for continuity of accessible paths for pedestrians should be incorporated into the TTC plan.</li>

      <li>Access to transit stops should be maintained.</li>

      <li>A smooth, continuous hard surface should be provided throughout the entire length of the temporary pedestrian facility. There should be no curbs or abrupt changes in grade or terrain that could cause tripping or be a barrier to wheelchair use. The geometry and alignment of the facility should meet the applicable requirements of the “<span class="text_deleted">Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG)</span><span class="text_added">U.S. Department of Justice 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, September 15, 2010 and Code of Federal Regulations. Title 28, Parts 35 and 36. Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990</span>” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>).</li>

      <li>The width of the existing pedestrian facility should be provided for the temporary facility if practical. Traffic control devices and other construction materials and features should not intrude into the usable width of the sidewalk, temporary pathway, or other pedestrian facility. When it is not possible to maintain a minimum width of 60 inches throughout the entire length of the pedestrian pathway, a 60 x 60-inch passing space should be provided at least every 200 feet to allow individuals in wheelchairs to pass.</li>

      <li>Blocked routes, alternate crossings, and sign and signal information should be communicated to pedestrians with visual disabilities by providing devices such as audible information devices, accessible pedestrian signals, or barriers and channelizing devices that are detectable to the pedestrians traveling with the aid of a long cane or who have <span class="text_deleted">low </span>vision<span class="text_added"> disabilities</span>. Where pedestrian traffic is detoured to a TTC signal, engineering judgment should be used to determine if pedestrian signals or accessible pedestrian signals should be considered for crossings along an alternate route.</li>

      <li>When channelization is used to delineate a pedestrian pathway, a continuous detectable edging should be provided throughout the length of the facility such that pedestrians using a long cane can follow it. These detectable edgings should comply with the provisions of <a href="part6m.xhtml#section6M04">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.74</span><span class="text_added">6M.04</span></a>.</li>

      <li>Signs and other devices mounted lower than 7 feet above the temporary pedestrian pathway should not project more than 4 inches into accessible pedestrian facilities.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para13">13</span><span class="option">Whenever it is feasible, closing off the worksite from pedestrian intrusion may be preferable to channelizing pedestrian traffic along the site with TTC devices.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para14">14</span><span class="guidance">Fencing should not create sight distance restrictions for road users. Fences should not be constructed of materials that would be hazardous if impacted by vehicles. Wooden railing, fencing, and similar systems placed immediately adjacent to motor vehicle traffic should not be used as substitutes for crashworthy temporary traffic barriers.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para15">15</span><span class="guidance">Ballast for TTC devices should be kept to the minimum amount needed and should be mounted low to prevent penetration of the vehicle windshield.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para16">16</span><span class="guidance">Movement by work vehicles and equipment across designated pedestrian paths should be minimized and, when necessary, should be controlled by flaggers or <span class="text_added">other </span>TTC.<span class="change_noted">Edited to improve accuracy</span> Staging or stopping of work vehicles or equipment along the side of pedestrian paths should be avoided, since it encourages movement of workers, equipment, and materials across the pedestrian path.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para17">17</span><span class="guidance">Access to the work space by workers and equipment across pedestrian walkways should be minimized because the access often creates unacceptable changes in grade, and rough or muddy terrain, and pedestrians will tend to avoid these areas by attempting non-intersection crossings where no curb ramps are available.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para18">18</span><span class="option">A canopied walkway may be used to protect pedestrians from falling debris, and to provide a covered passage for pedestrians.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para19">19</span><span class="guidance">Covered walkways should be sturdily constructed and adequately lighted for nighttime use.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para20">20</span><span class="guidance">When pedestrian and vehicle paths are rerouted to a closer proximity to each other, consideration should be given to separating them by a temporary traffic barrier.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para21">21</span><span class="guidance">If a temporary traffic barrier is used to shield pedestrians, it should be designed to accommodate site conditions.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para22">22</span><span class="support">Depending on the possible vehicular speed and angle of impact, temporary traffic barriers might deflect upon impact by an errant vehicle. Guidance for locating and designing temporary traffic barriers can be found in Chapter 9 of AASHTO’s “Roadside Design Guide” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>).</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para23">23</span><span class="standard">Normal vertical curbing shall not be used as a substitute for temporary traffic barriers when temporary traffic barriers are needed.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para24">24</span><span class="option">Temporary traffic barriers or longitudinal channelizing devices may be used to discourage pedestrians from unauthorized movements into the work space. They may also be used to inhibit conflicts with vehicular traffic by minimizing the possibility of midblock crossings.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para25">25</span><span class="support">A major concern for pedestrians is <span class="text_deleted">urban and suburban </span>building construction encroaching onto the contiguous sidewalks, which forces pedestrians off the curb into direct conflict with moving vehicles.<span class="change_noted">Edited to improve accuracy</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para26">26</span><span class="guidance">If a significant potential exists for vehicle incursions into the pedestrian path, pedestrians should be rerouted or temporary traffic barriers should be installed.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para27">27</span><span class="support">TTC devices, <span class="text_deleted">jersey</span><span class="text_added">temporary concrete</span> barriers, and wood or chain link fencing with a continuous detectable edging can satisfactorily delineate a pedestrian path.</span><span class="change_noted">Edited to improve accuracy</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para28">28</span><span class="guidance">Tape, rope, or plastic chain strung between devices are not detectable, <span class="text_added">and are therefore not accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. Such items </span><span class="text_deleted">do not comply with the design standards in the “Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG)” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>), and </span>should not be used as a control for pedestrian movements.</span><span class="change_noted">Edited to improve accuracy</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para29">29</span><span class="guidance">In general, pedestrian routes should be preserved in urban and commercial suburban areas. Alternative routing should be discouraged.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6C02_para30">30</span><span class="guidance">The highway agency in charge of the TTC zone should regularly inspect the activity area so that effective pedestrian TTC is maintained.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6C03">Section <span class="text_deleted">6D.02</span><span class="text_added">6C.03</span> Accessibility Considerations</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C03_para01">01</span><span class="support">Additional information on the design and construction of accessible temporary facilities is found in publications listed in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_deleted">11</span><span class="text_added">05</span></a> (see Publications 12, 38, 39, and 42).</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C03_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Adequate provisions should be made for pedestrians with disabilities. The extent of <span class="text_deleted">pedestrian </span>needs <span class="text_added">for such provisions </span>should be determined through engineering judgment or by the individual responsible for each TTC zone situation.</span><span class="change_noted">The sequence of the sentence has been rearranged</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">When existing pedestrian facilities are disrupted, closed, or relocated in a TTC zone, the temporary facilities shall be detectable and include accessibility features consistent with the features present in the existing pedestrian facility. <span class="text_deleted">Where pedestrians with visual disabilities normally use the closed sidewalk, a</span><span class="text_added">A</span> barrier that is detectable by a person with a visual disability traveling with the aid of a long cane shall be placed across the full width of the closed sidewalk. </span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C03_para04">04</span><span class="support">Maintaining a detectable, channelized pedestrian route is much more useful to pedestrians who have visual disabilities than closing a walkway and providing audible directions to an alternate route involving additional crossings and a return to the original route. Braille is not useful in conveying such information because it is difficult to find. Audible instructions might be provided, but the extra distance and additional street crossings might add complexity to a trip.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C03_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">Because printed signs and surface delineation are not usable by pedestrians with visual disabilities, blocked routes, alternate crossings, and sign and signal information should be communicated to pedestrians with visual disabilities by providing audible information devices, accessible pedestrian signals, and barriers and channelizing devices that are detectable to pedestrians traveling with the aid of a long cane or who have <span class="text_deleted">low </span>vision<span class="text_added"> disabilities</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C03_para06">06</span><span class="support">The most desirable way to provide information to pedestrians with visual disabilities that is equivalent to visual signing for notification of sidewalk closures is a speech message provided by an audible information device. Devices that provide speech messages in response to passive pedestrian actuation are the most desirable. Other devices that continuously emit a message, or that emit a message in response to use of a pushbutton, are also acceptable. signing information can also be transmitted to personal receivers, but currently such receivers are not likely to be carried or used by pedestrians with visual disabilities in TTC zones. Audible information devices might not be needed if detectable channelizing devices make an alternate route of travel evident to pedestrians with visual disabilities.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C03_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">If a pushbutton is used to provide equivalent TTC information to pedestrians with visual disabilities, the pushbutton should be equipped with a locator tone to notify pedestrians with visual disabilities that a special accommodation is available, and to help them locate the pushbutton.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6C04">Section <span class="text_deleted">6D.03</span><span class="text_added">6C.04</span> Worker Safety Considerations</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C04_para01">01</span><span class="support">Equally as important as the safety of road users traveling through the TTC zone is the safety of workers. TTC zones present temporary and constantly changing conditions that are unexpected by the road user. This creates an even higher degree of vulnerability for workers on or near the roadway.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6C04_para02">02</span><span class="support">Maintaining TTC zones with road user flow inhibited as little as possible, and using TTC devices that get the road user’s attention and provide positive direction are of particular importance. Likewise, equipment and vehicles moving within the activity area create a risk to workers on foot. When possible, the separation of moving equipment and construction vehicles from workers on foot provides the operator of these vehicles with a greater separation clearance and improved sight lines to minimize exposure to the hazards of moving vehicles and equipment.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C04_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The following are the key elements of worker safety and TTC management that should be considered to improve worker safety:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>Training—all workers should be trained on how to work next to motor vehicle traffic in a way that minimizes their vulnerability. Workers having specific TTC responsibilities should be trained in TTC techniques, device usage, and placement.</li>

      <li>Temporary Traffic Barriers—temporary traffic barriers should be placed along the work space depending on factors such as lateral clearance of workers from adjacent traffic, speed of traffic, duration and type of operations, time of day, and volume of traffic.</li>

      <li>Speed Reduction—reducing the speed of vehicular traffic, mainly through regulatory speed zoning, funneling, lane reduction, or the use of uniformed law enforcement officers or flaggers, should be considered.</li>

      <li>Activity Area—<span class="text_deleted">planning the internal work activity area to minimize backing-up maneuvers of construction vehicles should be considered to minimize the exposure to risk</span><span class="text_added">operations entering and departing the work space, and within the work space, should be planned to minimize backing maneuvers by construction vehicles and equipment to minimize the risk of runover and backover accidents</span>.<span class="change_noted">Edited to improve clarity</span></li>

      <li>Worker Safety Planning—a trained person designated by the employer should conduct a basic hazard assessment for the worksite and job classifications required in the activity area. This safety professional should determine whether engineering, administrative, or personal protection measures should be implemented. This plan should be in accordance with the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as amended, “General Duty Clause” Section 5(a)(1) - Public Law 91-596, 84 Stat. 1590, December 29, 1970, as amended, and with the requirement to assess worker risk exposures for each job site and job classification, as per 29 CFR 1926.20 (b)(2) of “Occupational Safety and Health Administration Regulations, General Safety and Health Provisions” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>).</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6C04_para04">04</span><span class="option">The following are additional elements of TTC management that may be considered to improve worker safety:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="option">
      <li>Shadow Vehicle—in the case of mobile and constantly moving operations, such as pothole patching and striping operations, a shadow vehicle, equipped with appropriate lights and warning signs, may be used to protect the workers from impacts by errant vehicles. The shadow vehicle may be equipped with a rear-mounted impact attenuator.</li>

      <li>Road Closure—if alternate routes are available to handle road users, the road may be closed temporarily<span class="text_deleted">. This may also</span><span class="text_added"> to</span> facilitate project completion and thus further reduce worker vulnerability.<span class="change_noted">Edited to improve accuracy</span></li>

      <li>Law Enforcement Use—in highly vulnerable work situations, particularly those of relatively short duration, law enforcement units may be stationed to heighten the awareness of passing vehicular traffic and to improve safety through the TTC zone.</li>

      <li>Lighting—for nighttime work, the TTC zone and approaches may be lighted.</li>

      <li>Special Devices—these include rumble strips, changeable message signs, hazard identification beacons, flags, and warning lights. Intrusion warning devices may be used to alert workers to the approach of errant vehicles.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C04_para05">05</span><span class="support">Judicious use of the special devices described in Item E in <a href="#section6C04_para04">Paragraph <span class="text_deleted">9</span><span class="text_added">4</span></a> might be helpful for certain difficult TTC situations, but misuse or overuse of special devices or techniques might lessen their effectiveness.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section6C05">Section <span class="text_deleted">6E.02</span><span class="text_added">6C.05</span> High-Visibility Safety Apparel</h3>
<span class="change_noted">This text was relocated from existing Section 6E.02 and incorporates text from existing Section 6D.03 to improve consistency</span>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C05_para01">01</span><span class="standard">For daytime and nighttime activity, <span class="text_deleted">flaggers</span><span class="text_added">all workers, including emergency repsonders, within the right-of-way who are exposed either to traffic (vehicles using the highway for purposes of travel) or to work vehicles and construction equipment within the TTC zone</span> shall wear high-visibility safety apparel that meets the Performance Class 2 or 3 requirements of the ANSI/ISEA 107–<span class="text_deleted">2004</span><span class="text_added">2015</span> publication entitled “American National Standard for High-Visibility Apparel and Headwear” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>)<span class="text_added">, or equivalent revisions,</span> <span class="text_deleted">and labeled as meeting the ANSI 107-2004 standard performance for Class 2 or 3 risk exposure</span><span class="text_added">except as provided in Paragraph 4</span>. <span class="text_added">A person designated by the employer to be responsible for worker safety shall make the selection of the appropriate class of garment.</span></span><span class="change_noted">Edited to incorporate text from existing Section 6D.03 and to improve consistency</span></p>

	<span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="standard">All workers, including emergency responders, within the right-of-way who are exposed either to traffic (vehicles using the highway for purposes of travel) or to work vehicles and construction equipment within the TTC zone shall wear high-visibility safety apparel that meets the Performance Class 2 or 3 requirements of the ANSI/ISEA 107–2004 publication entitled “American National Standard for High-Visibility Safety Apparel and Headwear” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>), or equivalent revisions, and labeled as meeting the ANSI 107-2004 standard performance for Class 2 or 3 risk exposure, except as provided in <a href="#section6D03_para05">Paragraph 5</a>. A person designated by the employer to be responsible for worker safety shall make the selection of the appropriate class of garment.</span></p></span>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6C05_para02">02</span><span class="standard">The apparel background (outer) material color shall be fluorescent orange-red, fluorescent yellow-green, or a combination of the two as defined in the ANSI standard. The retroreflective material shall be orange, yellow, white, silver, yellow-green, or a fluorescent version of these colors<span class="text_deleted">, and shall be visible at a minimum distance of 1,000 feet. The retroreflective safety apparel shall be designed to clearly identify the wearer as a person</span>.</span><span class="change_noted">Edited to improve consistency</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6C05_para03">03</span><span class="standard">When uniformed law enforcement <span class="text_deleted">officers</span><span class="text_added">personnel</span> are used to direct traffic<span class="text_deleted"> within a TTC zone</span>, <span class="text_added">to investigate crashes, or to handle lane closures, obstructed roadways, and disasters, </span><span class="text_deleted">they shall wear </span>high-visibility safety apparel as described in this Section<span class="text_added"> shall be worn by the law enforcement personnel</span>.</span><span class="change_noted">Edited to incorporate text from existing Section 6D.03 and to improve consistency</span></p>

	<span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="standard">When uniformed law enforcement personnel are used to direct traffic, to investigate crashes, or to handle lane closures, obstructed roadways, and disasters, high-visibility safety apparel as described in this Section shall be worn by the law enforcement personnel.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C05_para04">04</span><span class="option"><span class="text_deleted">In lieu of ANSI/ISEA 107-2004 apparel,</span><span class="text_added">Emergency and incident responders and</span> law enforcement personnel within the TTC zone may wear high-visibility safety apparel that meets the performance requirements of the ANSI/ISEA 207-2006 publication entitled “American National Standard for High-Visibility Public Safety Vests” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>)<span class="text_added">, or equivalent revisions,</span> and labeled as ANSI 207-2006<span class="text_added">, in lieu of ANSI/ISEA 107-2004 apparel</span>.</span><span class="change_noted">Edited to incorporate text from existing Section 6D.03 and to improve consistency</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="option">Emergency and incident responders and law enforcement personnel within the TTC zone may wear high-visibility safety apparel that meets the performance requirements of the ANSI/ISEA 207-2006 publication entitled “American National Standard for High-Visibility Public Safety Vests” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>), or equivalent revisions, and labeled as ANSI 207-2006, in lieu of ANSI/ISEA 107-2004 apparel.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6C05_para05">05</span><span class="standard">Except as provided in <a href="#section6C05_para06">Paragraph <span class="text_deleted">8</span><span class="text_added">6</span></a>, firefighters or other emergency responders working within the right-of-way shall wear high-visibility safety apparel as described in this Section.</span><span class="change_noted">This text was relocated from existing Section 6D.03</span></p>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C05_para06">06</span><span class="option">Firefighters or other emergency responders working within the right-of-way and engaged in emergency operations that directly expose them to flame, fire, heat, and/or hazardous materials may wear retroreflective turn-out gear that is specified and regulated by other organizations, such as the National Fire Protection Association.</span><span class="change_noted">This text was relocated from existing Section 6D.03</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6C05_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">For <span class="text_added">flagger wear during </span>nighttime activity, high-visibility safety apparel that meets the Performance Class 3 requirements of the ANSI/ISEA 107–<span class="text_deleted">2004</span><span class="text_added">2015</span> publication entitled “American National Standard for High-Visibility Apparel and Headwear” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>)<span class="text_added">, or equivalent revision,</span> and labeled as meeting the ANSI 107-<span class="text_deleted">2004</span><span class="text_added">2015</span> standard performance for Class 3 risk exposure should be <span class="text_deleted">considered for flagger wear</span><span class="text_added">worn</span>.</span><span class="change_noted">Relocated from above and edited to improve consistency</span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>