<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<link href="https://fonts.cdnfonts.com/css/helvetica-neue-55" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 3A - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 3A. General</h1>

    

    <h3 id="section3A01">Section 3A.01 Standardization of Application</h3>

	
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Markings are used to supplement other traffic control devices such as signs, signals, and other markings. In other instances, markings are used alone to effectively convey regulations, warnings, or guidance in ways not obtainable by the use of other devices.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para02">02</span><span class="support">Markings can take many forms including road surface markings, curb markings, delineators, colored pavements, and channelizing devices.</span></p>
	

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Each standard marking shall be used only to convey the meaning prescribed for that marking in this Manual, including when used for applications not described in this Manual.</span></p>

    

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para04">04</span><span class="standard">Except as provided in <a href="part3h.xhtml">Chapter 3H</a>, markings that must be visible at night shall be retroreflective unless the markings are adequately visible under street or highway lighting. All markings on Interstate highways shall be retroreflective.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para05">05</span><span class="standard">Markings that are no longer applicable for roadway conditions or restrictions and that might cause confusion for the road user shall be removed or obliterated to be unidentifiable as a marking as soon as practicable.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para06">06</span><span class="option">Until they can be removed or obliterated, markings that are no longer applicable for roadway conditions or restrictions may be temporarily masked with non-reflective, preformed tape that is approximately the same color as the pavement surface.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section3A02">Section 3A.02 Materials</h3>

    

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A02_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">The materials used for markings should provide the specified color throughout their useful life.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Consideration should be given to selecting pavement marking materials that will minimize tripping or loss of traction for road users, including pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorcyclists.</span></p>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A02_para03">03</span><span class="support">Marking systems that consist of clumps or droplets of material with visible open spaces of bare pavement between the material droplets, which can function in a manner that is similar to the marking systems that completely cover the pavement surface, may be used as pavement markings if they meet the other pavement marking requirements of the highway agency. </span></p>

    <h3 id="section3A03">Section 3A.03 Colors</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Markings shall be yellow, white, red, blue, or purple. The colors for markings shall conform to the standard highway colors.</span></p>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para02">02</span><span class="option">Black markings may be used in combination with the colors mentioned in <a href="#section3A03_para01">Paragraph 1</a> of this Section to enhance contrast with  a light-colored pavement.</span></p>
	
	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">When used, yellow markings for longitudinal lines shall delineate:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>The separation of traffic traveling in opposite directions,</li>

      <li>The left-hand edge of the roadways of divided highways and one-way streets or ramps, or</li>

      <li>The separation of two-way left-turn lanes and reversible lanes from other lanes.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para04">04</span><span class="standard">When used, white markings for longitudinal lines shall delineate:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>The separation of traffic flows in the same direction,</li>
      <li>The right-hand edge of the roadway, or</li>
		<li>Both the right-hand edge and left-hand edge of a reversible roadway.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para05">05</span><span class="standard">When used, red raised pavement markers or delineators shall delineate:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Truck escape ramps, or</li>

      <li>One-way roadways, ramps, or travel lanes that shall not be entered or used in the direction from which the markers are visible.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para06">06</span><span class="standard">When used, blue markings shall supplement white markings for parking spaces for persons with disabilities.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para07">07</span><span class="standard">When used, purple markings shall be in accordance with the provisions of <a href="part3f.xhtml">Chapter 3F</a> to identify toll plaza approach lanes restricted to use only by vehicles with registered electronic toll collection accounts.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para07">07</span><span class="standard">When pavement markings that simulate official route signs are used (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B22">Section 3B.22</a>), the colors shall be the same as those that are used for the route signs (see <a href="part2d.xhtml#section2D11">Section 2D.11</a>).</span></p>

    

	
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para08">08</span><span class="support">Provisions regarding colored pavements are contained in <a href="part3h.xhtml">Chapter 3H</a>.</span></p>
	

    <h3 id="section3A04">Section 3A.04 Functions, Widths, and Patterns of Longitudinal Pavement Markings</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para01">01</span><span class="standard">The general functions of longitudinal lines shall be as follows:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>A double line indicates maximum or special restrictions.</li>

      <li>A solid line discourages or prohibits crossing (depending on the specific application).</li>

      <li>A broken line indicates a permissive condition.</li>

      <li>A dotted lane line provides warning of a downstream change in lane function.</li>

		<li>A dotted line used as a lane line or edge line extension guides vehicles through an intersection, a taper area, or an interchange ramp area.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para02">02</span><span class="standard">The widths and patterns of longitudinal lines shall be as follows:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Normal line—4 to 6 inches wide.</li>

      <li>Wide line—at least twice the width of a normal line.</li>

      <li>Double line—two parallel lines separated by a discernible space. The pavement surface shall be visible between the lines in the same way that it is visible outside the lines, except where contrast markings are used in combination with the double line (see <a href="#section3A03">Section 3A.03</a>).</li>

      <li>Broken line—normal width line segments separated by gaps.</li>

      <li>Dotted line—noticeably shorter line segments separated by shorter gaps than used for a broken line. The width of a dotted line extension shall be at least the same as the width of the line it extends.</li>
    </ol>

	
	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">To be recognized as a double line rather than two separate, disassociated single lines, the discernible space separating the parallel lines of a double line should not exceed two times the line width of a single line.</span></p>
	

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para04">04</span><span class="support">The width of the line indicates the degree of emphasis.</span></p>
	
	
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para05">05</span><span class="support">Increasing edge line width from 4 inches to 6 inches has been shown to be a beneficial countermeasure to enhance safety at locations with a history of run-off-the-road crashes (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B09">Section 3B.09</a>). Wider normal lines with a 6-inch width instead of the minimum 4-inch width can be beneficial to both human drivers and driving automation systems (see <a href="part5b.xhtml#section5B02">Section 5B.02</a>).</span></p>
	

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Broken lines should consist of 10-foot line segments and 30-foot gaps, or dimensions in a similar ratio of line segments to gaps as appropriate for traffic speeds and the need for delineation.</span></p>

    

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">A dotted line used as a lane line (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B07">Section 3B.07</a>) should consist of 3-foot line segments and 9-foot gaps. A dotted line for line extensions within an intersection, taper area, or interchange ramp area (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B11">Section 3B.11</a>) should consist of 2-foot line segments and 2-foot to 6-foot gaps.</span></p>

	
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para08">08</span><span class="support">Section 5B.02 contains information on pavement marking considerations for driving automation systems.</span></p>
	

	
	<h3 id="section3A05">Section 3A.05 Maintaining Minimum Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Except as provided in <a href="#section3A05_para05">Paragraph 5</a> of this Section, a method designed to maintain retroreflectivity at or above 50 mcd/m<span style="vertical-align: super;">2</span>/lx under dry conditions shall be used for longitudinal markings on roadways with speed limits of 35 mph or greater.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Except as provided in <a href="#section3A05_para05">Paragraph 5</a> of this Section, a method designed to maintain retroreflectivity at or above 100 mcd/m<span style="vertical-align: super;">2</span>/lx under dry conditions should be used for longitudinal </span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The method used to maintain retroreflectivity shuld be one or more of those described in “Methods for Maintaining Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity” (FHWA-SA-22-028), 2022 Edition, FHWA or developed from an engineering study based on the values in <a href="#section3A05_para01">Paragraphs 1</a> and <a href="#section3A05_para02">2</a> of this Section.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para04">04</span><span class="support">Retroreflectivity levels for pavement markings are measured with an entrance angle of 88.76 degress and an observation angle of 1.05 degrees. This geometry is also referred to as 30-meter geometry. The unit of pavement marking retroreflectivity are reported in mcd/m<span style="vertical-align: super;">2</span>/lx, which means millicandelas per square meter per lux.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para05">05</span><span class="option">The following markings may be excluded from the provisions established in <a href="#section3A05_para01">Paragraphs 1</a> and <a href="#section3A05_para02">2</a> of this Section:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="option">
      <li>Markings where ambient illumination assures that the markings are adequately visible;</li>

      <li>Markings on streets or highways that have an ADT of less than 6,000 vehicles per day;</li>

      <li>Dotted extension lines that extend a longitudinal line through an intersection, major driveway, or interchange area (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B11">Section 3B.11</a>);</li>

      <li>Curb markings;</li>

      <li>Parking space markings; and</li>

      <li>Shared-use path markings.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para06">06</span><span class="support">The provisions of this section do not apply to non-longitudinal pavement markings including, but not limited to, the following:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Transverse markings;</li>

      <li>Word, symbol, and arrow markings;</li>

      <li>Crosswalk markings; and</li>

      <li>Chevron, diagonal, and crosshatch markings.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para07">07</span><span class="support">Special circumstances will periodically cause pavement marking retroreflectivity to be below the minimum levels. These circumstances include, but are not limited to, the following:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Isolated locations of abnormal degradation;</li>

      <li>Periods preceding imminent resurfacing or reconstruction;</li>

      <li>Unanticipated events such as equipment breakdowns, material shortages, and contracting problems; and</li>

      <li>Loss of retroreflectivity resulting from snow maintenance operations.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para08">08</span><span class="support">When such circumstances occur, compliance with <a href="#section3A05_para01">Paragraphs 1</a> and <a href="#section3A05_para02">2</a> is still considered to be achieved if a reasonable course of action is taken to resume maintenance of minimum retroreflectivity in a timely manner according to the maintaining agency's method(s), policies, and procedures.</span></p>
	
  </div>
</body>
</html>