<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 1D - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 1D. Provisions Applicable to Traffic Control Devices in General</h1>

	<h3 id="section1D01">Section 1D.01 Purpose and Principles of Traffic Control Devices</h3>

	

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para01">01</span> <span class="support">The purpose of traffic control devices, as well as the principles for their use, is to promote highway safety, inclusion and mobility of all road users, and efficiency by providing for the orderly movement of road users on streets, highways, bikeways, and site roadwaysopen to public travel throughout the Nation. <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A03">Section 1A.03</a> contains additional information on target road users.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para02">02</span> <span class="support">This Manual contains the basic principles that govern the design and use of traffic control devices for all streets, highways, bikeways, and site roadwaysopen to public travel (see definition in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a>) regardless of type or class or the public agency, official, or owner having jurisdiction. The text of this Manual text specifies the restriction on the use of a device if it is intended for limited application or for a specific system. It is important that these principles be given primary consideration in the selection and application of each device.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">To be effective, a traffic control device should:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>Fulfill a need;</li>
      <li>Command attention;</li>
      <li>Convey a clear, simple meaning;</li>
      <li>Command respect from road users; and</li>
      <li>Give adequate time for proper response.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para04">04</span> <span class="guidance">Design, placement, operation, maintenance, and uniformity are aspects that should be carefully considered in order to maximize the ability of a traffic control device to be consistent with the five principles listed in the <a href="#section1D01_para03">Paragraph 3</a> of this Section. Vehicle speed and road-user types should be carefully considered as an element that governs the design, operation, placement, and location of various traffic control devices.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para05">05</span> <span class="guidance">The proper use of traffic control devices should provide the road user with the information necessary to safely, efficiently, and lawfully use the streets, highways, pedestrian facilities, and bikeways.</span>&gt;</p>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para06">06</span><span class="standard">Traffic control devices used on site roadways open to public travel shall have the same shape, color, and meaning as those required by the MUTCD for use on public highways, except as provided otherwise in this Manual. Sign size exceptions are noted in each Part as applicable.</span></p>

    


    

	

    <h3 id="section1D02">Section 1D.02 Responsibility and Authority for Traffic Control Devices</h3>

	

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">The responsibility for the design, placement, operation, maintenance, and uniformity of traffic control devices in compliance with the provisions of this Manual shall rest with the public agency or the official having jurisdiction, or, in the case of site roadwaysopen to public travel, with the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.</span></p>

    

    

    

	    <h3></h3>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para02">02</span><span class="standard">All regulatory traffic control devices shall be supported by laws, ordinances, or regulations.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para03">03</span> <span class="standard">Traffic control devices, public announcements or notices, and other signs or messages within the highway right-of-way shall be placed only as authorized by a public authority or the official having jurisdiction, or, in the case of site roadways or private toll roadsopen to public travel, by the private owner or private official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para04">04</span> <span class="standard">When the public agency or the official having jurisdiction over a street or highway or, in the case of site roadways open to public travel, the private owner or private official having jurisdiction, has granted proper authority, others such as contractors and public utility companies shall be allowed to install temporary traffic control devices in temporary traffic control zones. Such traffic control devices shall comply with the provisionsof this Manual.</span></p>

    

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para05">05</span><span class="standard">Signs and other devices that do not have any traffic control purpose that are placed within the highway right-of-way shall not be located where they will interfere with, or detract from, traffic control devices.</span></p>

    

	
	

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para06">06</span><span class="support">States are encouraged to adopt, through policy or legislation, the provisions of 23 CFR 750.108 that restrict outdoor advertising from resembling traffic control devices.</span></p>
	

	<h3 id="section1D03">Section 1D.03 Engineering Study and Engineering Judgment</h3>

	
	

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para01">01</span> <span class="support">Definitions of professional engineer, engineering study,and engineering judgment are contained in <a href="#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a>.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para02">02</span><span class="support">The application of engineering study and engineering judgement is a fundamental principle of the use of traffic control devices. It is for this reason that, in most cases, the selection of a particular device is not required by a Standard provision, but is determined by engineering study or engineering judgment. Many Standard provisions in this Manual specifically require, by explicit language in the individual provisions or by implication, the application of engineering study or engineering judgment in applying those Standards. Site-specific conditions might result in the determination that it is impossible or impracticable to comply with a Standard at that location. In such a case, a deviation from the requirement of a particular Standard at that location might be the only possibility. In such limited, specific cases, the deviation is allowed, provided that the agency or official having jurisdiction fully documents, through an engineering study, the engineering basis for the deviation.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">This Manual describes the application of traffic control devices, but shall not be a legal requirement for their installation.</span></p>

	
	
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para04">04</span> <span class="support">The MUTCD does not mandate, and is not intending to imply, that an engineer must make the final decision whether to implement or execute the determination or advice of an engineer by installing or constructing the traffic control device to the engineer’s specification in the field. Rather, the engineer, individual under supervision of an engineer, or other individual as duly authorized by State law to engage in the practice of engineering, develops an engineering-based solution that includes the specifications for selection and placement of traffic control devices, but the responsibility for a final decision to implement that solution rests with the agency having jurisdiction over the roadway, after consultation with and based on advice from the engineer.</span></p>
	
	

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">The decision to use a particular device at a particular location should be made on the basis of either an engineering study or the application of engineering judgment by an engineer, someone under the direct supervision of an engineer, or other individual as duly authorized by State law to engage in the practice of engineering. Thus, while this Manual provides Standards, Guidance, and Options for design and applications of traffic control devices, this Manual should not be considered a substitute for engineering judgment. Engineering judgment should be exercised in the selection and application of traffic control devices, as well as in the location and design of roads and streets that the devices complement.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Early in the processes of location and design of roads and streets, engineers should coordinate such location and design with the design and placement of the traffic control devices to be used with such roads and streets.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">Jurisdictions, or owners of site roadways or private toll roads open to public travel, with responsibility for traffic control that do not have an engineer on their staff who is trained and/or experienced in traffic control devices should seek engineering assistance from others, such as the State transportation agency, their county, a nearby large city, or a traffic engineering consultant.</span></p>

	
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span> <br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para08">08</span><span class="support">The provisions of this Manual are intended to be interpreted and applied by engineers or those under the supervision of an engineer. The construction of the provisions of this Manual, therefore, are informed by bases referenced in <a href="#section1D03_para09">Paragraphs 9</a> and <a href="#section1D03_para10">10</a> of this Section.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para09">09</span><span class="support">The National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) has defined the practice of engineering as “any service or creative work requiring engineering education, training, and experience in the application of engineering principles and the interpretation of engineering data to engineering activities that potentially impact the health, safety, and welfare of the public.” The practice of engineering is, therefore, subject to regulation in the public interest and is regulated by the State licensing boards in order to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The NCEES has defined an engineer as “an individual who is qualified to practice engineering by reason of engineering education, training, and experience in the application of engineering principles and the interpretation of engineering data.”</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para10">10</span><span class="support">The U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) has defined the professional knowledge of engineering as “the comprehensive, in-depth knowledge of mathematical, physical, and engineering sciences applicable to a specialty field of engineering that characterizes a full 4-year engineering program leading to a bachelor’s degree, or the equivalent.” The OPM has defined professional ability to apply engineering knowledge as “the ability to (a) apply fundamental and diversified professional engineering concepts, theories, and practices to achieve engineering objectives with versatility, judgment, and perception; (b) adapt and apply methods and techniques of related scientific disciplines; and (c) organize, analyze, interpret, and evaluate scientific data in the solution of engineering problems.”</span></p>
	

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para11">11</span><span class="support">Requisite technical training in the application of the principles of the MUTCD might be available from the State’s Local Technical Assistance Program (LTAP) for needed engineering guidance and assistance.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section1D04">Section 1D.04 Design of Traffic Control Devices</h3>

	

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Devices should be designed so that features such as size, shape, color, composition, lighting or retroreflection, and contrast are combined to draw attention to the devices; so that size, shape, color, and simplicity of message combine to produce a clear meaning; so that legibility and size combine with placement to provide adequate time for response; and so that uniformity, size, legibility, and reasonableness of the message combine to command respect.</span></p>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para02">02</span><span class="option">Except for symbols and colors, minor modifications in the specific design elements of a device may be made based on an engineering study or engineering judgment, in accordance with <a href="#section1D04_para03">Paragraph 3</a> of this Section, provided the essential appearance characteristics are preserved.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para03">03</span> <span class="guidance">Aspects of the standard design of a traffic control device should not be modified unless there is a demonstrated need in unusual circumstances, based on an engineering study or engineering judgment.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para04">04</span><span class="support">An example of acceptably modifying the design of a device would be to modify the Combination Horizontal Alignment/Intersection (W1-10) sign to show intersecting side roads on both sides rather than on just one side of the major road within the curve.</span></p>

	

    <h3 id="section1D05">Section 1D.05 Color Code</h3>

	

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para01">01</span><span class="support">The following color code establishes general meanings for 11 colors of a total of 13 colors that have been identified as being appropriate for use in conveying traffic control information.</span></p>
    
    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para02">02</span><span class="standard">The general meaning of the 13 colors shall be as follows:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Black—regulation</li>

      <li>Blue—road-user services guidance, tourist information, and evacuation route</li>

      <li>Brown—recreational and cultural interest area guidance</li>

      <li>Coral—reserved for future designation (see Paragraph 4 of this Section)</li>

      <li>Fluorescent Pink—incident management</li>

      <li>Fluorescent Yellow-Green—pedestrian warning, bicycle warning, playground warning, school bus warning, and school warning</li>

      <li>Green—indicated movements or actions permitted and direction guidance</li>

      <li>Light Blue—reserved for future designation (see <a href="#section1D05_para04">Paragraph 4</a> of this Section)</li>

      <li>Orange—temporary traffic control</li>

      <li>Purple—restricted to use only by vehicles with registered electronic toll collection (ETC) accounts</li>

      <li>Red—stop or prohibition</li>

      <li>White—regulation</li>

      <li>Yellow—warning</li>
    </ol>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para03">03</span><span class="standard">These colors shall be used only as prescribed for the specific devices or applications throughout this Manual.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para04">04</span><span class="support">The two colors for which general meanings have not yet been assigned are being reserved for future applications that will be determined only by the FHWA after consultation with the States, the engineering community, and the general public. The meanings described in this Section are of a general nature. More specific assignments of colors are given in the individual Parts of this Manual relating to each class of devices. Tolerance limits for each color are contained in 23 CFR Part 655, Appendix to Subpart F and are available at the Federal Highway Administration’s MUTCD Web site at <a href="../../index.html">http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov</a>. </span></p>

	<h3 id="section1D06">Section 1D.06 Public Domain, Copyrights, and Patents</h3>

	

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Traffic control device design or application provisions contained in this Manual shall be in the public domain. Traffic control devices contained in this Manual shall not be protected by a patent, trademark, or copyright, except for the Interstate Shield, 511 Travel Information pictograph, National Scenic Byway graphic, and any items under the stewardship of or owned by the FHWA.</span></p>

	
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para02">02</span><span class="standard">A traffic control device design or application shall not be eligible for official experimentation (see <a href="part1b.xhtml#section1B05">Section 1B.05</a>) or interim approval (see <a href="part1b.xhtml#section1B07">Section 1B.07</a>) unless it is in the public domain. Express abandonment of any and all forms of proprietary protection, such as patents, trademarks, or copyrights, related to the design and application of the traffic control device shall satisfy the requirement for the traffic control device to be in the public domain.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para03">03</span><span class="standard">The requirement for the traffic control device to be in the public domain shall not apply to individual components used in the assembly or manufacture of the traffic control device.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para04">04</span><span class="support">The limitation on patented, trademarked, or copyrighted traffic control devices applies to the message that the device conveys to the road user. If a patent or other protection covers the device’s communication to the road user by virtue of its appearance, audible message, or other aspects of the message conveyed (such as the order in which traffic control signal indications change from green to yellow to red), then the device is considered to be protected and not in the public domain. Such a device is precluded from inclusion in this Manual. The purpose of this limitation is to ensure uniformity of the messaging of individually approved traffic control devices. This limitation does not apply to other aspects of a device (such as internal controls, circuitry, electronics, mechanics, or housing) so long as the appearance, audible message, or other aspects of the message conveyed, including the manner of conveyance, remain freely reproducible by all without infringing on any proprietary rights or interests. This Manual does not prohibit such other aspects of a traffic control device that meet the legal requirements from being protected through patent, trademark, or copyright; and does not restrict components, parts, manufacturing processes, or similar aspects of traffic control devices from being patented or otherwise protected. Examples of acceptable protected traffic control device components or parts might include: sign sheeting or retroreflectivity technology, internal electronic components of traffic signal controllers, and breakaway sign support mechanisms.</span></p>
	

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para05">05</span><span class="support">Pictographs, as defined in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a>, are embedded in traffic control devices but the pictographs themselves are not considered traffic control devices for the purposes of <a href="#section1D06_01">Paragraph <span class="known_error_deleted">4</span><span class="known_error_added">1</span></a> of this Section.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para06">06</span><span class="support">Business identification logos, as defined in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a>, are embedded in traffic control devices but the pictographs themselves are not considered traffic control devices for the purposes of <a href="#section1D06_para01">Paragraph <span class="known_error_deleted">4</span><span class="known_error_added">1</span></a> of this Section.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section1D07">Section 1D.07 Advertising</h3>
	

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D07_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">Traffic control devices or their supports shall not bear any advertising message or any other message that is not related to traffic control.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D07_para02">02</span> <span class="support">Acknowledgement signs (see <a href="part2h.xhtml#section2H13">Section 2H.13</a>), Specific Service signs (see <a href="part2j.xhtml">Chapter 2J</a>), and Tourist-Oriented Directional signs (see <a href="part2k.xhtml">Chapter 2K</a>) are not considered advertising.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section1D08">Section 1D.08 Abbreviations Used on Traffic Control Devices</h3>
	

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para01">01</span><span class="standard">When the word messages shown in <a href="#table1D01">Table 1D-1</a> need to be abbreviated in connection with traffic control devices, the abbreviations shown in Table 1D-1shall be used.</span></p>

    <table border="0" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="0" id="table1D01">
      <caption>Table 1D-1. Acceptable Abbreviations</caption>

      <thead>
		<tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
		<th colspan="2" class="tablecell-top-left-cell">General Abbreviations</th>
		</tr>
        <tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
          <th class="tablecell-top-left-cell" scope="col">Word Message</th>
          <th class="tablecell-top-right-cell" scope="col">Standard Abbreviation</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Afternoon / Evening</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">PM</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Alternate</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">ALT</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">AM Radio</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">AM</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Avenue</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">Ave, Av*</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Bicycle(s)</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">BIKE, BIKES</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Boulevard</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">Blvd*</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Bridge</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">(See <a href="#table1D02">Table 1D-2</a>)</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">CB Radio</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">CB</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Center</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">Ctr**</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Circle</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">Cir*</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Civil Defense</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">CD</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Compressed Natural Gas</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">CNG</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Court</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">Ct*</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Crossing (other than highway-rail)</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">X-ING</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Drive</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">Dr*</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">East</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">E</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Electric Vehicle</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">EV</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Expressway</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">Expwy*</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Feet</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">FT</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">FM Radio</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">FM</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Freeway</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">Fwy*</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Hazardous Material(s)</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">HAZMAT, HAZMATS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">High Occupancy Vehicle(s)</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">HOV</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Highway</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">Hwy*</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Hospital</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">HOSP</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Hour(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            HR, HRS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Information
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            INFO
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Inherently Low Emission Vehicle
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            ILEV
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            International
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Intl
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Interstate</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">(See <a href="#table1D02">Table 1D-2</a>)</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Junction / Intersection
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            JCT
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Lane</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">(See <a href="#table1D02">Table 1D-2</a>)</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Liquid Propane Gas
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            LP-GAS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Maximum
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MAX
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Mile(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MI
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Miles Per Hour
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MPH
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Minimum
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MIN
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Minute(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MIN, MINS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Morning / Late Night
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            AM
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Mount
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Mt**
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Mountain
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Mtn**
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            National
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Natl**
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            North
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            N
          </td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Northeast
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            NE
          </td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Northwest
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            NW
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Parkway
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Pkwy*
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Pedestrian(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            PED, PEDS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Place
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Pl*
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Pounds
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            LBS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Road
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Rd*
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Saint
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            St**
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            South
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            S
          </td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Southeast
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            SE
          </td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Southwest
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            SW
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            State, county, or other non-US<br/>

            or non-Interstate numbered route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            (See <a href="#table1D02">Table 1D-2</a>)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Street
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            St*
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Telephone
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            PHONE
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Temporary
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            TEMP
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Terrace
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Ter*
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Thruway
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Thwy*
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Ton(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            T
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Trail
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Tr*
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Turnpike
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Tpk*
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Two-Way Intersection, Two-Way Traffic
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            2-WAY
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            US Numbered Route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            (See <a href="#table1D02">Table 1D-2</a>)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            West
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            W
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
		<th colspan="2">Days of the Week</th>
		</tr>
		<tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
          <th class="tablecell-top-left-cell" scope="col">
            Day
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-top-right-cell" scope="col">
            Standard Abbreviation
          </th>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            Sunday
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            SUN
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            Monday
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            MON
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            Tuesday
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            TUES***
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            Wednesday
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            WED
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            Thursday
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            THURS***
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            Friday
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            FRI
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            Saturday
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            SAT
          </td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    <p class="tablenote">*Abbreviation shall not be used for any application other than the name of a roadway. See <a href="part2d.xhtml#table2D03">Table 2D-3</a> for complete list of street name descriptors. Examples include: Bayshore Fwy, Cross County Hwy, Mid-County Pkwy<br/>
	
	**Abbreviation shall not be used for any application other than as a descriptor or title within a proper name. Examples include: Vestal Ctr, Mt Hope, Pocono Mtn, Eldorado Natl Forest, St Louis<br/>
	***Tuesday and Thursday may be abbreviated on a Changeable Message Sign (CMS) to TUE and THU, respectively, when the number of Characters in a messages to be dispayed cannot be practically reduced through rewording to fit the number of characters supported by the CMS, such as might occur at times on a portable CMS.<br/>
	Note: Abbreviations shown in upper- and lower-case lettering may be in all upper-case lettering when displayed on a changeable message sign with lower resolution that will not accommodate lower-case letter forms. See <a href="part2l.xhtml">Chapter 2L</a> of this Manual.
	</p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para02">02</span><span class="standard">When the word messages shown in <a href="#table1D02">Table 1D-2</a> need to be abbreviated on a portable changeable message sign, the abbreviations shown in Table 1D-2 shall be used. Unless indicated by an asterisk, these abbreviations shall only be used on portable changeable message signs.</span></p>

    <table border="0" cellpadding="2" dir="ltr" cellspacing="0" summary="List of abbreviations for word messages on portable changeable message signs" id="table1D02">
      <caption>Table 1D-2. Abbreviations that Shall be Used Only for Temporary Messages on Portable Changeable Message Signs</caption>

      <thead>
        <tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
          <th class="tablecell-top-left-cell" scope="col">
            Word Message
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-toprow" scope="col">
            Standard <br/>Abbreviation
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-toprow" scope="col">
            Prompt Word <br/>

            Preceding the <br/>Abbreviation
          </th>

          <th align="center" class="tablecell-toprow" scope="col">
            Prompt Word  <br/>
            Following the <br/>Abbreviation
          </th>
			<th align="center" class="tablecell-top-right-cell" scope="col">
            Example
          </th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Access
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            ACCS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Road
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            ACCS ROAD
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Ahead
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            AHD
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Fog
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            FOG AHD
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Blocked
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            BLKD
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Lane
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            2 LANES BLKD
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Bridge
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            BR*
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            [Name]
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            BAY BR
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Cannot
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CANT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Center
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CNTR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            CNTR LANE, CNTR LN
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Chemical
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CHEM
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Spill
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            CHEM SPILL
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Condition
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            COND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Traffic
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            TRAFFIC COND
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Congested
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CONG
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Traffic
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            TRAFFIC CONG AHD
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Construction
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CONST
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Ahead
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            CONST AHEAD
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Crossing
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            XING
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            PED XING
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Do Not
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            DONT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Downtown
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            DWNTN
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Traffic
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            DWNTN TRAFFIC
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Eastbound
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            EAST
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Route Number, Road Name
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            I-4 EAST
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            E-BND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane, Traffic
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            E-BND LANE
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Emergency
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            EMER
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            EMER VEHICLES
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Entrance, Enter
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            ENT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            ENT TO I-90
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Exit
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            EX
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Next
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            NEXT EX
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Express
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            EXP
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            EXP LANE OPEN
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Frontage
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            FRNTG
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Road
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            FRNTG RD
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Hazardous
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            HAZ
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Driving
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            HAZ DRIVING
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Highway-Rail Grade Crossing
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RR XING
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            RR XING
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Interstate
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            I-*
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            [Number]
          </td>
			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            I-80
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            It Is
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            ITS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Lane(s) (travel lanes of a highway)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LN
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            
            Right, Left, Center
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            LEFT LN ONLY<br/>2 RIGHT LNS
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Left
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LFT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Keep, Next
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            NEXT LFT
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LFT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            LFT LANE
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Local
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LOC
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Traffic
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            LOC TRAFFIC ONLY
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Lower
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LWR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Level
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            LWR LEVEL
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Maintenance
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            MAINT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            ROAD MAINT
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Major
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            MAJ
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Crash
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MAJ CRASH
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Minor
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            MNR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Crash
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MNR CRASH
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Normal
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            NORM
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Northbound
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            NORTH
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Route Number, Road Name
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            US 1 NORTH
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            N-BND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane, Traffic
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            N-BND TRAFFIC
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Oversized
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            OVRSZ
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Load
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            OVRSZ LOAD
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Parking
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            PKING
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Pavement
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            PVMT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Icy
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            ICY PVMT
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Prepare
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            PREP
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            To Stop
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            PREP TO STOP
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Quality
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            QLTY
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Air
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            AIR QLTY
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Right
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Keep, Next
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            KEEP RT
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            RT LANE
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Roadwork
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RDWK
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Ahead, [Distance]
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            RD WK 1 MILE
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RTE
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Best
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            BEST RTE
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Service
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SERV
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            SERV AREA OPEN
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Shoulder
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SHLDR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            SHLDR CLOSED
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Slippery
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SLIP
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Southbound
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SOUTH
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Route Number, Road Name
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            CA 1 SOUTH
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            S-BND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane, Traffic
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            S-BND TRAFFIC
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Speed
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SPD
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            SPD LIMIT
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            State, county, or other non-US <br/>

            or non-Interstate numbered route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            [Route Abbreviation <br/>

            determined by <br/>

            highway agency]*
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            [Number]**
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            NY 7, CR 43
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Tires With Lugs
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LUGS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Traffic
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            TRAF
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Travelers
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            TRVLRS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Two-Wheeled Vehicles
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CYCLES
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Upper
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            UPR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Level
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            UPR LEVEL
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            US Numbered Route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            US*
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            [Number]**
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            US 202
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Vehicle(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            VEH, VEHS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Warning
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            WARN
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Westbound
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            WEST
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Route Number, Road Name
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            IL 53 WEST
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            W-BND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane, Traffic
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            W-BND LANES
          	</td>
        </tr>


        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            Will Not
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottomrow">
            WONT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottomrow">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottomrow">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            —
          	</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    <p><span class="tablenote">* Abbreviation, when accompanied by the prompt word, may be used on traffic control devices other than portable message signs.See <a href="#table1D01">Table 1D-1</a> for uses and format.<br/> ** A space and no hyphen shall be placed between the abbreviation and the number of the route.<br/>Note: See <a href="part2l.xhtml">Chapter 2L</a> of this Manual for additional information on changeable message signs</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The abbreviations for the words listed in <a href="#table1D02">Table 1D-2</a> that also show a prompt word should not be used on a Portable Changeable Message sign (or a static sign if indicated in Table 1D-2 by an asterisk) unless the prompt word shown in <a href="#table1D02">Table 1D-2</a> either precedes or follows the abbreviation, as applicable.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para04">04</span><span class="standard">The abbreviations shown in <a href="#table1D03">Table 1D-3</a> shall not be used in connection with traffic control devices because of their potential to be misinterpreted by road users.</span></p>

    <table border="0" cellpadding="2" dir="ltr" cellspacing="0" summary="List of abbreviations not to use" id="table1D03">
      <caption>Table 1D-3. Unacceptable Abbreviations</caption>

      <thead>
        <tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
          <th class="tablecell-top-left-cell" scope="col">
            Abbreviation
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-toprow" scope="col">
            Intended Word
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-top-right-cell" scope="col">
            Common Misinterpretations
          </th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            ACC
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Accident
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Access (Road)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            CLRS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Clears
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Colors
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            DLY
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Delay
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Daily
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            FDR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Feeder
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Federal
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            L
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Left
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane (Merge)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            LT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Light (Traffic)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Left
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            PARK
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Parking
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Park
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            POLL
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Pollution (Index)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Poll
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            RED
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Reduce
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Red
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            STAD
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Stadium
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Standard
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            WRNG
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottomrow">
            Warning
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            Wrong
          </td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">If <a href="#table1D01">Table 1D-1</a> or <a href="#table1D02">1D-2</a> indicates that more than one abbreviation is permitted for a given word or phrase, the same abbreviation should be used throughout a single jurisdiction.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Except as otherwise provided in <a href="#table1D01">Table 1D-1</a> or <a href="#table1D02">1D-2</a> or unless necessary to avoid confusion, periods, commas, apostrophes, question marks, ampersands, and other punctuation marks or characters that are not letters or numerals should not be used in any abbreviation.</span></p>


    <h3 id="section1D09">Section 1D.09 Placement and Operation of Traffic Control Devices</h3>
	

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">Before any highway, site roadway open to public travel (see definition in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a>), detour, or temporary route is opened to public travel, all traffic control devices necessary for safe operation shall be in place.</span></p>

	
	
	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para02">02</span><span class="option">Temporary traffic control devices, as provided for in Part 6 of this Manual, may be used in place of permanent devices that have yet to be installed for safe operation.</span></p>
	
	

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Placement of a traffic control device should be within the road user’s view so that adequate visibility is provided. To aid in conveying the proper meaning, the traffic control device should be appropriately positioned with respect to the location, object, or situation to which it applies. The location and legibility of the traffic control device should be such that a road user has adequate time to make the proper response in both day and night conditions.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Traffic control devices should be placed and operated in a uniform and consistent manner as part of maintaining uniformity in traffic control.</span></p>

	
	
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para05">05</span><span class="support">Inconsistent placement or use of a device can result in disrespect for the device at locations where the device is needed and appropriate.</span></p>
	
	

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Unnecessary traffic control devices should be removed. The fact that a device is in good physical condition should not be a basis for deferring needed removal or change.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para07">07</span><span class="support"><a href="part2a.xhtml#section2A02">Section 2A.02</a> contains information on excessive use of signs and other considerations that can reduce their effectiveness and the effectiveness of other traffic control devices.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section1D10">Section 1D.10 Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices</h3>

	

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D10_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Functional maintenance of traffic control devices should be used to determine if certain devices need to be changed to meet current traffic conditions.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D10_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Physical maintenance of traffic control devices should be performed to retain the legibility and visibility of the device, and to retain the proper functioning of the device.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D10_para03">03</span><span class="support">Clean, legible, properly mounted devices in good working condition command the respect of road users.</span></p>

	
	<h3 id="section1D11">Section 1D.11 Crashworthiness of Traffic Control Devices and Other Roadside Appurtenances</h3>

	

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D11_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">In accordance with various Sections of this Manual, certain traffic control devices and their supports, and/or related appurtenances shall be crashworthy (see definition in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a>). Crashworthiness provisions in this Manual shall apply to all streets, highways, and site roadways open to public travel.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D11_para02">02</span><span class="support">Roadside appurtenances include permanent and portable sign supports, other permanent or temporary traffic control devices, and other roadside fixtures that are not traffic control devices, such as longitudinal barriers, bridge railings, and crash cushions, within the clear zone. Crashworthiness of a device or appurtenance is determined by nationally established standards such as the “Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware” (MASH), 2016, AASHTO. Information on the FHWA’s policy on crashworthiness of devices on the National Highway System and other roadways is available at the FHWA Office of Safety Web site at <a href="https://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/roadway_dept/countermeasures/reduce_crash_severity/policy_memo_guidance.cfm">https://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/roadway_dept/countermeasures/reduce_crash_severity/policy_memo_guidance.cfm</a></span></p>
	

  </div>
</body>
</html>