<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 5A - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">

    <h1>Chapter 5A. General</h1>

    <h3 id="section5A01">Section 5A.01 Scope and Purpose</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A01_para01">01</span><span class="support">The scope of the provisions of this Part are intended for consideration of traffic control devices that are specifically being designed to accommodate automated vehicles capable of performing partial or full real-time operational functions in general traffic on a sustained basis. This Part does not require agencies to use these provisions in their accommodation of automated vehicles on their roadways. Rather, the purpose of these provisions is to provide agencies with general considerations and guidance for traffic control devices that can be more helpful in the accommodation of such vehicles, while at the same time being more beneficial to road users.</span></p>	

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A01_para02">02</span><span class="support">It is important for early implementers of automated vehicles to understand the ramifications of traffic control devices in a mixed fleet environment and to consider the needs of both human and machine-led road users. Partial automation technologies are already commercially available in the vehicle fleet and are operating under current infrastructure conditions. The overall effectiveness of the automation is impacted by the uniformity and consistent application of the highway infrastructure, including traffic control devices.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A01_para03">03</span><span class="support">This Chapter provides an overview of foundational driving automation system (see definition in <a href ="#section5A03">Section 5A.03</a>) terminology, key principles, considerations for traffic control device selection, and topics for agencies to consider. The MUTCD does not address standardization of digital infrastructure, geometric road design, traffic control device  maintenance levels, minimum pavement conditions, or other items that might be important for safe and effective operation of driving automation system technologies.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section5A02">Section 5A.02 Overview of Connected and Automated Vehicles</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A02_para01">01</span><span class="support">Driving automation system technology automates some or all aspects of the driving tasks to assist or replace the human driver and can include driver assistance technology generally known as advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS). Automated vehicles (AVs) are vehicles in which at least one element of vehicle control (such as steering, speed control, or braking) occurs without direct human driver input. AVs function by gathering information from a suite of sensors that can include, but are not limited to:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="support">
	<li>Cameras;</li>
	<li>Radar;</li>
	<li>Light detection and ranging (LiDAR);</li>
	<li>Ultrasonic; and</li>
	<li>Infrared.</li>
	</ol>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A02_para02">02</span><span class="support">AVs can combine sensor data with other inputs including detailed map data and information from other connected vehicles or infrastructure. AVs might be able to detect and classify objects in their surroundings and might predict how they are likely to behave.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A02_para03">03</span><span class="support">Connected vehicle technology enables cars, buses, trucks, trains, roads, and roadside infrastructure, as well as other devices such as cellular telephones, to communicate with one another. Connected vehicle technology enabling vehicles to communicate with each other is known as vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V). Connected vehicle technology enabling vehicles to communicate with infrastructure is known as vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I). Connected vehicle technology enables equipped vehicles on the road to be aware of the location and status of other nearby equipped vehicles or devices. Road users could receive notifications and alerts of dangerous situations, such as a vehicle that is about to run a red traffic signal as it nears an intersection, or an oncoming car, that is out of sight beyond a curve swerving into the opposing lane to avoid an object on the road.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section5A03">Section 5A.03 Definitions and Terms</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A03_para01">01</span><span class="support">The definitions and terms shown in Items A through G below, which are found in the Society of Automotive Engineers standard SAE J3016 and other sources, are used extensively in automated vehicle technology. Their definitions, which are summarized below for reference and for use with the provisions of this Manual, are as follows:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="support">
	<li>Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) – Electronic systems that aid a vehicle driver with one or more driving tasks while driving. They are intended to increase safe operation of a vehicle and include applications such as automatic braking, lane keeping assistance, adaptive cruise control, and others.</li>
	<li>Automated Driving Systems (ADS) - The hardware and software that are collectively capable of performing the entire Dynamic Driving Task (DDT) on a sustained basis, regardless of whether it is limited to a specific Operational Design Domain (ODD); this term is used specifically to describe a Level 3, 4, or 5 driving automation system (DAS).</li>
	<li>Automation levels: The levels of automation that are described in <a href ="#table5A01">Table 5A-1</a>.</li>
	<li>Cooperative Automation – Technology that enables communication with other vehicles and the infrastructure to coordinate automated vehicle operation.</li>
	<li>Driving Automation System - The hardware and software that are collectively capable of performing part or all of the DDT on a sustained basis; this term is used generically to describe any system capable of Levels 1 thorough 5 driving automation.</li>
	<li>Dynamic Driving Task (DDT) - All of the real-time operational and tactical functions required to operate a vehicle in on-road traffic, excluding the strategic functions such as trip scheduling and selection of destinations and waypoints.</li>
	<li>Operational Design Domain (ODD) - Operating conditions under which a given DAS or feature thereof is specifically designed to function, including, but not limited to, environmental, geographical, and time-of-day restrictions, and/or the requisite presence or absence of certain traffic or roadway characteristics.</li>
	</ol>

	
	<table id="table5A01" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="2" width="100%">
      <caption>Table 5A-1. Automation Levels</caption>

      <thead>
        <tr align="center" bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
        		<th valign="middle">Automation Level</th>
			<th valign="middle">Description</th>
          	<th valign="middle">Automation Category</th>
			<th valign="middle">Automation Type</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody>
        <tr>
          	<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">Level 0</td>
			<td align="left" valign="middle">The full-time performance by the human driver in all aspects of the Dynamic Driving Task, even when enhanced by warning or momentary intervention systems.</td>
			<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">None*</td>
			<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">None</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          	<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">Level 1</td>
			<td align="left" valign="middle">The driving mode specific execution by a sustained driver assistance system of either steering or acceleration/deceleration using information about the driving environment and with the expectation that the human driver performs all remaining aspects of the Dynamic Driving Task.</td>
			<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;" rowspan="2">Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS)</td>
			<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;" rowspan="5">Driving Automation System</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          	<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">Level 2</td>
			<td align="left" valign="middle">The driving mode specific execution by one or more sustained driver assistance systems of both steering and acceleration/deceleration using information about the driving environment and with the expectation that the human driver performs all remaining aspects of the Dynamic Driving Task.</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          	<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">Level 3</td>
			<td align="left" valign="middle">The driving mode specific sustained performance by an ADS of all aspects of the Dynamic Driving Task within a given ODD with the expectation that the human driver will respond appropriately to a request to intervene.</td>
			<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;" rowspan="3">Automated Driving System (ADS)</td>
        </tr>

        	<tr>
          	<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">Level 4</td>
			<td align="left" valign="middle">The driving mode specific sustained performance by an ADS of all aspects of the Dynamic Driving Task, even if a human driver does not respond appropriately to a request to intervene.</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          	<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">Level 5</td>
			<td align="left" valign="middle">The full-time sustained performance by an ADS of all aspects of the Dynamic Driving Task under all roadway and environmental conditions that can be managed by a human driver.</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

	<div class="tablenote">
	<p>*NOTE: Level 0 might include some ADAS features, but they are considered to be warning or momentary intervention systems at this level.</p>
	</div>
	

	<h3 id="section5A04">Section 5A.04 Traffic Control Device Design and Use Considerations</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para01">01</span><span class="support">The interaction of traffic control devices with driving automation systems can create many challenges for agencies in determining traffic control device selection and application. The lack of tolerance of driving automation systems for non-uniformity in traffic control device design and application is a limiting factor of current driving automation system sophistication. This is because driver automation systems have a limited ability to interpolate across gaps in traffic control device cues to the vehicle in the following types of situations:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="support">
		<li>The driving automation system technology's ability to adapt to existing traffic control device design and typical quality, such as the refresh rates of electronic changeable message sign displays or the overall quality of a device that has been in service on the roadway for many years;</li>
		<li>The color perception of signs;</li>
		<li>The electronically perceptible conspicuity and contrast of markings in different environments and lighting conditions;</li>
		<li>The driving automation system camera technology and device photometric characteristics in interpreting various types of traffic signals</li>
		<li>The ability to discern and comprehend temporary traffic control devices and their varying applications, such as active electronic display devices or flaggers; and</li>
		<li>The ability to decipher traffic control at highway-rail or highway-LRT grade crossings, especially at passive grade crossings.</li>
	</ol>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para02">02</span><span class="support">These and other challenges might limit the functionality of driving automation systems, thus making them less effective or functional, with potential implications for safety and traffic operations. The uniform design and consistent application of standardized traffic control devices supports the functionality of driving automation system technology in many situations. Similarly, good traffic control device maintenance practices and programs will help improve the potential for driving automation systems to operate properly in many roadway environments.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Agencies should adopt traffic control device maintenance policies and or practices with consideration to both the human driver and driving automation system technology needs (see <a href ="part1d.xhtml#section1D10">Sections 1D.10</a>, <a href ="part2a.xhtml#section2A19">2A.19</a>, <a href ="part3a.xhtml#section3A05">3A.05</a> and <a href ="part4a.xhtml#section4A10">4A.10</a>).</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Engineering judgment (see <a href ="part1d.xhtml#section1D03">Section 1D.03</a>) used to determine traffic control device selection and placement should consider uniformity in application and location needed to support both the human driver and driving automation system technology.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para05">05</span><span class="support">A systematic approach to traffic control device selection, application, and maintenance taking into consideration certain fundamental principles, will help agencies considering the inclusion of AVs on their roadways. Generally, improvements to traffic control device uniformity and improved maintenance policies and practices that keep traffic control devices in good working order with high levels of conspicuity that are beneficial to the human driver will be beneficial to AVs as well.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Agencies should apply the following fundamental principles and considerations as they evaluate traffic control devices and other maintenance practices to support driving automation system technologies during maintenance and infrastructure improvements:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
	<li>Applying uniform and consistent traffic control devices on each type of roadway, and applying a similar approach to traffic control at similar locations in similar situations.</li>
	<li>Establishing maintenance policies that incorporate effective practices to identify and then fix or replace in a timely manner any traffic control device that is reaching the end of their useful life, or are damaged or otherwise no longer serviceable, be identified, fixed or replaced in a timely manner.</li>
	<li>Making sure that temporary or emergency traffic control, to the extent practicable, is planned in advance using devices that comply with the provisions of this Manual and that follow policies designed to provide uniformity throughout the site and across jurisdiction.</li>
	<li>Removing extraneous devices that are no longer necessary or that provide limited benefit to vehicle operation or navigation.</li>
	</ol>


  </div>
</body>
</html>