<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 5B - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 5B. Provisions for Traffic Control Devices</h1>

    <h3 id="section5B01">Section 5B.01 Signs</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Driving automation systems use sensors, algorithms, and processing to locate, read, and comprehend traffic signs and assist the human driver or AV in appropriately making vehicle operational decisions. Location, condition, uniformity, design characteristics, and consistent application all affect the ability of driving automation systems to perform these functions.</span></p>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B01_para02">02</span><span class="standard">When scanning graphics (see <a href ="part2a.xhtml#section2A04">Section 2A.04</a>) of any type are used on a sign for support of driving automation systems, the scanning graphics shall not be visible to the human eye and the sign shall have no apparent loss of resolution or recognition for the road user.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B01_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Agencies seeking to better accommodation driving automation systems to support AVs, while also potentially benefitting human drivers, should consider:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
		<li>Clearly associating the sign location and application with the displayed message to the specific lane or road to which it applies, such as in the case of parallel roads or lanes with different speed limits or restrictions.</li>
		<li>The practice of sign and information spreading (see <a href ="part2a.xhtml#section2A20">Section 2A.20</a>) to limit the amount of information displayed in one location or on one sign to minimize sign clutter.</li>
		<li>Signs with designs that are otherwise not provided for in this Manual or the "Standard Highway Signs" publication (see <a href ="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.05</a>) are deisgned based on the standardized sign design practices and features as provided for in this Manual for the type of sign, the location, and characteristics of the roadway on which it is used.</li>
		<li>The refresh rate of LEDs in the illuminated portion of electronic-display signs to provide for greater consistency in driving automation system detection.</li>
	</ol>

    <h3 id="section5B02">Section 5B.02 Markings</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B02_para01">01</span><span class="support">Driving automation systems use sensors, algorithms, and processing to locate, read, and comprehend pavement markings. Location, condition, uniformity, design characteristics, and consistent application all have some effect on the ability of driving automation systems to perform this function. Certain pavement marking applications and practices have been shown through research to better support driving automation system technology, while also benefiting, or at least not detracting from, the performance of the human operator.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Agencies seeking to better accommodate driving automation system to support AVs, which also potentially benefitting human drivers, should consider:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
	<li>Normal width longitudinal lines of at least 6 inches in width (see <a href ="section3a.xhtml#section3A04">Section 3A.04</a>).</li>
	<li>Edge lines of at least 6 inches in width (see <a href ="part3a.xhtml#section3A09">Sections 3A.04</a> and <a href ="part43b.xhtml#section3B09">3B.09</a>).</li>
	<li>Dotted edge line extensions along all entrance and exit ramps, all auxiliary lanes, and all tapers where a deceleration or auxiliary lane is added (see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B11">Section 3B.11</a>).</li>
	<li>Chevron markings in the neutral areas of exit gores to distinguish them from travel lanes (see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B25">Section 3B.25</a>).</li>
	<li>Continuous markings at the beginning of work zones and in all lane transitions.</li>
	<li>Raised pavement markers only as a supplement to, rather than as a substitute for, markings (see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B16">Sections 3B.16</a> and <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B17">3B.17</a>).</li>
	<li>Uniform contrast markings on light-colored pavements to create greater contrast.</li>
	<li>Broken lines with uniform marking and gap length (see <a href ="part3a.xhtml#section3A04">Section 3A.04</a>).</li>
	<li>Avoidance of decorative elements in crosswalks.</li>
	</ol>

    <h3 id="section5B03">Section 5B.03 Highway Traffic Signals</h3>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B03_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Agencies seeking to better accommodate driving automation systems to support AVs, while also potentially benefitting human drivers, should consider:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
	<li>Consistent signal face placement along corridors with respect to overhead mounting versus post mounting on the side of the roadway.</li>
	<li>Consistent number of signal faces for approach lanes and the selection of signal indications and signal clusters along a corridor to promote uniform displays for identical or similar situations.</li>
	<li>The refresh rate of LED traffic signals to provide for greater consistency in driving automation system detection.</li>
	<li>Providing signal faces with backplates (see Section 4D.06) having retroreflective borders to enhance signal face conspicuity and detection by driving automation system sensors.</li>
	<li>Using FLASHING YELLOW ARROW signal indications for permissive turns.</li>
	</ol>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B03_para02">02</span>Signal faces that display a CIRCULAR GREEN indication and that are located over or directly in line with a mandatory turn lane can be less effective for driving automation systems to recognize as a traffic signal face controlling permissive turning movements.</p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B03_para03">03</span><span class="support">Achieving uniformity along a corridor is desirable for driving automation systems, but can be challenging. Multiple options are available for traffic signal displays to allow design variations based on specific intersection variables such as available overhead clearance, utility conflicts, signal support design constraints<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> and other factors. V2I capabilities can complement driving automation system recognition of traffic signals to improve reliability and accuracy.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section5B04">Section 5B.04 Temporary Traffic Control</h3>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Agencies seeking to better accommodate driving automation systems to support<span class="known_error_added"> AVs</span>, which also potentially benefitting the human drivers, in and through temporary traffic control (TTC) zones should consider:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
		<li>Consistent type, spacing, and mounting heights of signs (see <a href ="part6b.xhtml#section6B04">Sections 6B.04</a> and <a href ="part6f.xhtml#section6F02">6F.02</a>).</li>
		<li>Use of the END ROAD WORK (G20-2) sign to establish the end of the TTC zone (see <a href ="part6h.xhtml#section6H36">Section 6H.36</a>).</li>
		<li>Wider retroreflective material on, or reduced spacing of, channelizing devices to better accommodate driving automation system sensors in nighttime and adverse weather conditions (see <a href ="part6k.xhtml">Chapter 6K</a>).</li>
		<li>Continuous markings at the beginning of TTC zones and in lane transitions.</li>
		<li>Temporary raised pavement markings only as a supplement to, rather than as a substitute for, pavement markings.</li>
		<li>Removal or obliteration of pavement markings that are no longer applicable as soon as practicable, for long-term stationary operations in the temporary traveled way (see <a href ="part6j.xhtml#section6J01">Section 6J.01</a>).</li>
	</ol>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para02">02</span><span class="support">Pavement markings that are not fully removed and pavement scarring are of particular concern as there can be misinterpretation by driving automation systems that can result in erroneous vehicle positioning in TTC zones.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para03">03</span><span class="support">V2I communications can complement driving automation systems recognition in TTC zones by communicating the presence of a TTC zone to vehicles.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para04">04</span><span class="support"><a href ="part6j.xhtml#section6J01">Section 6J.01</a> describes the use of pavement markings in TTC zones and the removal or obliteration of existing pavement markings.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para05">05</span><span class="support"><a href ="part6j.xhtml#section6J02">Section 6J.02</a> describes the use of temporary pavement markings in TTC zones.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section5B05">Section 5B.05 Traffic Control for Railroad and Light Rail Transit Grade Crossings</h3>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B05_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Agencies seeking to better accommodate driving automation systems to support AVs, which also potentially benefitting human drivers, at grade crossings should consider:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
		<li>Consistent placement of signs and markings for passive and active grade crossings along a corridor to promote uniformity and to improve the ability of driving automation system technoogy to recognize grade crossings.</li>
		<li>Removal of signs and pavement markings associated with grade that are out of service (see <a href ="part8a.xhtml#section8A09">Section 8A.09</a>).</li>
	</ol>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B05_para02">02</span><span class="support">V2I communications can complement driving automation system recognition of grade crossings to improve reliability and accuracy, and to relay information on the arrival or presence of a train or LRT vehicle at a grade crossing.</span></p>

    	<h3 id="section5B06">Section 5B.06 Traffic Control for Bicycle Facilities</h3>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B06_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Agencies seeking to better accommodate driving automation systems to support AVs, while also potentially benefitting human road users, should consider:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
		<li>Use of an END (R3-9dP) plaque with a BIKE LANE (R3-17) sign to indicate the end of a bicycle lane that is merging with other traffic (see <a href ="part2b.xhtml#section2B33">Sections 2B.33</a> and <a href ="part9b.xhtml#section9B04">9B.04</a>).</li>
		<li>Use of Bicycle Lane Ends (W9-5) and Bicycle Merging (W9-5a) warning signs in advance of the end of a bicycle lane and where a merging maneuver might occur (see <a href ="part9c.xhtml#section9C07">Section 9C.07</a>).</li>
	</ol>

	
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B06_para02">02</span><span class="support">Bicycle facilities that are physically separated from motor vehicle traffic using vertical object or vertical separation can facilitation detection from driving automation system sensors (see <a href ="part9e.xhtml#section9E07">Section 9E.07</a>).</span></p>
	
  </div>
</body>
</html>