<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 7D - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 7D. Crossing Supervision</h1>

    

    

    <h3 id="section7D01">Section 7D.01 Adult Crossing Guards</h3>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section7D01_para01">01</span><span class="option">Adult crossing guards may be used to provide gaps in traffic at school crossings where an engineering study has shown that adequate gaps need to be created, and where authorized by law.</span></p>

	
	

	
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section7D01_para02">02</span><span class="support">Adult crossing guards can also add conspicuity at the crossing where children, who are typically smaller in stature, might not be as visible.</span></p>
	
	

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section7D01_para03">03</span><span class="support">High standards for selection of adult crossing guards are essential because they are responsible for the safety of and the efficient crossing of the street by schoolchildren within and in the immediate vicinity of school crosswalks.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section7D01_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Jurisdictions should have policies and procedures for the qualifications, selection, and training of adult crossing guards.</span></p>

    

    

    <h3 id="section7D02">Section 7D.02 Operating Procedures for Adult Crossing Guards</h3>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section7D02_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Law enforcement officers performing school crossing supervision and adult crossing guards shall wear high-visibility retroreflective safety apparel labeled as ANSI 107-2020 standard performance for Class 2, Type R, as described in <a href="part6c.xhtml#section6C05">Section 6C.05</a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section7D02_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Adult crossing guards shall not direct traffic in the usual law enforcement regulatory sense. In the control of traffic, they shall pick opportune times to create a sufficient gap in the traffic flow. At these times, they shall stand in the roadway to indicate that pedestrians are about to use or are using the crosswalk, and that all vehicular traffic must stop.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section7D02_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Adult crossing guards shall use a STOP paddle. The STOP paddle shall be the primary hand-signaling device.</span></p>

	
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section7D02_para04">04</span><span class="standard">The STOP paddle shall comply with the provisions for a STOP/SLOW paddle (see <a href="part6d.xhtml#section6D02">Section 6D.02</a>) except both sides shall be a STOP face.</span></p>
	

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section7D02_para05">05</span><span class="standard">The paddle shall be retroreflective or illuminated when used during hours of darkness.</span></p>

    
  </div>
</body>
</html>