<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 9F - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 9F. Signals</h1>

    <h3 id="section9F01">Section 9F.01 Application</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section9F01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Part 4 contains information regarding signal warrants and other requirements relating to signal installations.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section9F01_para02">02</span><span class="option">For purposes of signal warrant evaluation, bicycles may be counted as either vehicles or pedestrians.</span></p>

	
	<h3 id="section9F02">Section 9F.02 Bicycle Signal Faces</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section9F02_para01">01</span><span class="support"><a href="part4h.xhtml">Chapter 4H</a> contains information on the design and application of bicycle signal faces.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section9F02_para02">01</span><span class="support"><a href="part9b.xhtml#section9B22">Section 9B.22</a> contains information for the Bicycle Signal sign that is required to be installed with a bicycle signal face.</span></p>
	

    <h3 id="section9F03">Section 9F.03 Signal Operations for Bicycles</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section9F03_para01">01</span><span class="standard">At installations where visibility-limited signal faces are used, signal faces shall be adjusted so bicyclists for whom the indications are intended can see the signal indications. If the visibility-limited signal faces cannot be aimed to serve the bicyclist, then separate signal faces shall be provided for the bicyclist.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section9F03_para02">02</span><span class="standard">On bikeways, signal timing and actuation shall be reviewed and adjusted to consider the needs of bicyclists.</span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>