<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 6E - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 6E. One-Lane, Two-Way Traffic Control</h1>

    <h3 id="section6E01">Section 6E.01 One-Lane, Two-Way Traffic Control — General</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E01_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Except as provided in Paragraph 4 of this Section, when traffic in both directions must use a single lane for a limited distance, movements from each end shall be coordinated.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E01_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Provisions should be made for alternate one-way movement through the constricted section via methods such as flagger control, a flag transfer, a pilot car, traffic control signals, or stop or yield control.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6E01_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Control points at each end should be chosen to permit easy passing of opposing lanes of vehicles.</span></p>

    

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E01_para04">04</span><span class="option">If the work space on a low-volume street or road is short and road users from both directions are able to see the traffic approaching from the opposite direction through and beyond the worksite, the movement of traffic through a one-lane, two-way constriction may be self-regulating.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6E02">Section 6E.02 Flagger Method</h3>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E02_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Except as provided in <a href="#section6E02_para02">Paragraph 2</a> of this Section, traffic should be controlled by a flagger at each end of a constricted section of roadway. One of the flaggers should be designated as the coordinator. To provide coordination of the control of the traffic, the flaggers should be able to communicate with each other orally, electronically, or with manual signals. These manual signals should not be mistaken for flagging signals.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E02_para02">02</span><span class="option">When a one-lane, two-way TTC zone is short enough to allow a flagger to see from one end of the zone to the other, traffic may be controlled by either a single flagger or by a flagger at each end of the section.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E02_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">When a single flagger is used, the flagger should be stationed on the shoulder opposite the constriction or work space, or in a position where good visibility and traffic control can be maintained at all times. When good visibility and traffic control cannot be maintained by one flagger station, traffic should be controlled by a flagger at each end of the section.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6E03">Section 6E.03 Flag Transfer Method</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E03_para01">01</span><span class="support">The driver of the last vehicle proceeding into the one-lane section is given a red flag (or other token) and instructed to deliver it to the flagger at the other end. The opposite flagger, upon receipt of the flag, then knows that traffic can be permitted to move in the other direction. A variation of this method is to replace the use of a flag with an official pilot car that follows the last road user vehicle proceeding through the section.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E03_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">The flag transfer method should be employed only where the one-way traffic is confined to a relatively short length of a road, usually no more than 1 mile in length.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6E04">Section 6E.04 Pilot Car Method</h3>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E04_para01">01</span><span class="option">A pilot car may be used to guide a queue of vehicles through the TTC zone or detour.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E04_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">The pilot car should have the name of the contractor or contracting authority prominently displayed.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E04_para03">03</span><span class="standard">The PILOT CAR FOLLOW ME (G20-4) sign (see <a href="part4h.xhtml#section4H01">Figure 6H-1</a>) shall be mounted on the top or on the rear of the pilot vehicle (see <a href="part6h.xhtml#section6H37">Section 6H.37</a>).</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6E04_para04">04</span><span class="standard">The pilot car operation shall be coordinated with flagging operations or other methods of control at each end of the one lane section of the work zone.</span></p>

	
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6E04_para05">05</span><span class="standard">If an Automated Flagger Assistance Device (AFAD) (see <a href="part6l.xhtml#section6L02">Section 6L.02</a>) is used in pilot car operations, the AFAD shall be operated by a flagger positioned near and within the line of sight of the AFAD. The AFAD shall not be left unattended at any time that the AFAD is being used.</span></p>
	

	
	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E04_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">If temporary traffic control signals are used in pilot car operations and long wait times will be encountered by road users, consideration should be given to using signs to notify drivers of the wait time and/or pilot car operation, based on engineering judgment.</span></p>
	

    <h3 id="section6E05">Section 6E.05 Temporary Traffic Control Signal Method</h3>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E05_para01">01</span><span class="option">Traffic control signals may be used to control vehicular traffic movements in one-lane, two-way TTC zones (see <a href="part6p.xhtml#figure6P12">Figure 6P-12</a> and <a href="part4o.xhtml">Chapter 4O</a>).</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6E06">Section 6E.06 Stop or Yield Control Method</h3>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E06_para01">01</span><span class="option">STOP or YIELD signs may be used to control traffic on low-volume roads at a one-lane, two-way TTC zone when drivers are able to see the other end of the one-lane, two-way operation and have sufficient visibility of approaching vehicles.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E06_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">If the STOP or YIELD sign is installed for only one direction, then the STOP or YIELD sign should face road users who are driving on the side of the roadway that is closed for the work activity area.</span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>