<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 4K - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1><span class="text_added">Chapter 4K. Accessible Pedestrian SIgnals and Detectors</span></h1>

    <h3 id="section4K01">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.09</span><span class="text_added">4K.01</span> <span class="text_deleted">Accessible Pedestrian Signals and Detectors – </span>General</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>428. In Section 4K.01, General, FHWA proposes to change existing Option P9 to Guidance and revise the text to recommend pedestrian push buttons be used to activate the accessible pedestrian signals at locations where it is not necessary for pedestrians to push a push button detector to receive a WALKING PERSON signal indication, and to provide information in non-visual formats. FHWA proposes this revision to align with accessible pedestrian signal guidance throughout Part 4.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The proposed change is not adopted based on equity concerns since activation of the accessible pedestrian features would require a button push while visual pedestrian signal indications would not.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">See also the Preamble of Federal Register for additional discussion of Accessible Pedestrian Signals.</p>
	</div>

	<div class="fr">
	<h4>Accessibility</h4>
	<p>In an effort to improve accessibility to provide for the protection of vulnerable road users while not getting ahead of the then-pending PROWAG rulemaking, FHWA proposed numerous changes to improve accessibility in Parts 4 and 6. In Part 4, the proposed changes were to recommend, rather than provide an option, to use accessible pedestrian signals (APS) at all pedestrian signals, including pretimed traffic control signals or non-actuated approaches as well as at pedestrian hybrid beacons (PHB). Further, FHWA proposed to recommend the use of an audible information device (AID) at rectangular rapid flashing beacons, pedestrian-actuated warning beacon, and in-roadway warning lights at crosswalks.</p>

	<p>The FHWA received a large number of comments related to the proposed changes encouraging the incorporation of PROWAG and to strengthen accessibility requirements. The comments stated that FHWA should adopt positions of greatly increased accessibility requirements similar to what was anticipated in the final rule for PROWAG. Other commenters, including many State DOTs and local agencies opposed significant accessibility changes based on their concerns with the cost impact and the significant level of effort to implement widescale increased accessibility measures, especially if there was not a demonstrated need for such accommodations at a specific location. The FHWA notes that at the time of publication of the NPA, the U.S. Access Board had not concluded its rulemaking and the provisions of a potential final rule were unknown. The U.S. Access Board has since finalized its rulemaking process for PROWAG (88 FR 53604, August 8, 2023; effective date September 7, 20203). Therefore, FHWA did not have the opportunity to seek public comment on adopting the provisions of the PROWAG final rule during the course of this rulemaking. As such, FHWA only adopts the proposed NPA revisions that strengthen the provisions for the protection of vulnerable users, consistent with section 11135 of BIL. The FHWA anticipates the MUTCD undergoing further rulemaking to address sections affected by the final PROWAG. In the meantime, DOT has initiated a rulemaking to incorporate the PROWAG into the ADA regulations of the Office of the Secretary of Transportation.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Accessible pedestrian signals and detectors provide information in non-visual formats (such as audible tones<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> and/or</span> speech messages, and<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">/or</span> vibrating surfaces).<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> The decision of when to use accessible pedestrian signals is subject to the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para02">02</span><span class="support">The primary technique that pedestrians <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">who have visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">with vision</span> disabilities use to cross streets at signalized locations is to initiate their crossing when they hear the traffic in front of them stop and the traffic alongside them begin to move, which often corresponds to the onset of the green interval. The existing environment is often not sufficient to provide the information that pedestrians <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">who have visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">with vision</span> disabilities need to cross a roadway at a signalized location.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para03">03</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">If</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">The following factors are relevant in determining whether</span> a particular signalized location presents difficulties for pedestrians <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">who have</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">with</span> <span class="text_deleted">visual</span><span class="text_added">vision</span> disabilities to cross the roadway<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">, an engineering study should be conducted that considers the needs of pedestrians in general, as well as the information needs of pedestrians with <span class="text_deleted">visual</span><span class="text_added">vision</span> disabilities. The engineering study should consider the following factors:</span></span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Potential demand for accessible pedestrian signals;</li>
      <li>A request for accessible pedestrian signals;</li>
      <li>Traffic volumes during times when pedestrians might be present, including periods of low traffic volumes or high turn-on-red volumes;</li>
      <li>The complexity of <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the </span>traffic signal phasing (such as split phases, protected turn phases, leading pedestrian intervals, and exclusive pedestrian phases); and</li>
      <li>The complexity of <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the </span>intersection geometry.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para04">04</span><span class="support">The factors that make crossing at a signalized location difficult for pedestrians <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">who have visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">with vision</span> disabilities include: increasingly quiet <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">cars, right turn</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vehicles, turns</span> on red (which mask<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span> the beginning of the through phase), continuous <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">right-turn</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">turning</span> movements, complex signal operations, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">traffic circles</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">circular intersections</span>, and wide streets. <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Furthermore</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">In addition</span>, low traffic volumes might make it difficult for pedestrians <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">who have visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">with vision</span> disabilities to discern signal phase changes.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para05">05</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">L</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">State and l</span>ocal organizations<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span> providing support services to pedestrians <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">who have visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">with vision</span> and/or hearing disabilities<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span> can <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">often act as important advisors</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">provide advice</span> to the traffic engineer <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">when consideration is being given to the installation of devices to assist such pedestrians. Additionally</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">on site-specific accessibility decisions. In addition</span>, orientation and mobility specialists or similar staff <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">also might be able to</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">can</span> provide a <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">wide range of </span>advice<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> to inform such decisions</span>. The U.S. Access Board (www.access-board.gov) provides technical assistance for making pedestrian signal information <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">available</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">accessible</span> to persons with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vision</span> disabilities<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> (see Page i for the address for the U.S. Access Board)</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para06">06</span><span class="standard">When used, accessible pedestrian signals shall be used in combination with pedestrian signal timing.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para07">07</span><span class="standard">The information provided by an accessible pedestrian signal shall <span class="text_deleted">clearly </span>indicate which pedestrian crossing is served by each device.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para08">08</span><span class="standard">Under <span class="text_added">steady (</span>stop-and-go<span class="text_added">)</span> operation, accessible pedestrian signals shall not be limited in operation by the time of day or day of week.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para09">09</span><span class="option">Accessible pedestrian signal detectors may be push<span class="text_added"> </span>buttons or passive detection devices.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span></span><br/></span><span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para10">10</span><span class="option">At locations <span class="change_from_npa">with pretimed traffic control signals or non-actuated approaches</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">where it is not necessary for pedestrians to push a push button detector to receive a WALKING PERSON signal indication</span></span>, pedestrian push<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> </span>buttons <span class="change_from_npa">may</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">should</span></span> be used to activate the accessible pedestrian signals<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added"> and to provide information in non-visual formats to assist pedestrians with visual disabilities</span></span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para11">11</span><span class="support">Accessible pedestrian signals are typically integrated into the pedestrian detector (push<span class="text_added"> </span>button), so the audible tones and/or messages come from the push<span class="text_added"> </span>button housing. They have a push<span class="text_added"> </span>button locator tone and <span class="text_added">a vibro</span>tactile arrow, and can include audible beaconing and other special features.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para12">12</span><span class="option">The name of the street to be crossed may also be provided in accessible format, such as Braille or raised <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">print</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">characters</span>. Tactile maps of crosswalks may also be provided.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para13">13</span><span class="support">Specifications regarding the use of Braille or raised <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">print</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">characters</span> <span class="text_deleted">for traffic control devices </span>can be found in the <span class="text_deleted">“Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG)”</span><span class="text_added">U.S. Department of Justice 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, September 15, 2010<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> and Code of Federal Regulations, Title 28, Parts 35 and 36</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">28 CFR 35 and 36</span>, Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>)</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K01_para14">14</span><span class="standard">At accessible pedestrian signal locations where <span class="text_added">pressing the </span>pedestrian push<span class="text_added"> </span>button<span class="text_deleted">s are used</span><span class="text_added"> is necessary to activate the walk interval</span>, <span class="text_deleted">each</span><span class="text_added">pressing the pedestrian</span> push<span class="text_added"> </span>button shall activate both the walk interval and the accessible pedestrian signals.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4K02">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.10</span><span class="text_added">4K.02</span> <span class="text_deleted">Accessible Pedestrian Signals and Detectors – </span>Location</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K02_para01">01</span><span class="support">Accessible pedestrian signals that are located as close as possible to pedestrians waiting to cross the street provide the clearest and least ambiguous indication of which pedestrian crossing is served by a device.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Push<span class="text_added"> </span>buttons for accessible pedestrian signals should be located in accordance with the provisions of <a href="part4i.xhtml#section4I05">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.08</span><span class="text_added">4I.05</span></a> and should be located as close as possible to the crosswalk line furthest from the center of the intersection and as close as possible to the curb ramp.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K02_para03">03</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_added">Except for the situation regarding simultaneous <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">"Walk"</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">walk</span> indications for <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">both</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">all</span> crosswalks<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> as described in Paragraph 8 of Section 4I.06</span>, i</span><span class="text_deleted">I</span>f two accessible pedestrian push<span class="text_added"> </span>buttons are placed less than 10 feet apart or on the same pole<span class="text_added"> (see <a href="part4i.xhtml#section4I05_para07">Paragraphs 7</a> and <a href="part4i.xhtml#section4I05_para08">8</a> in <a href="part4i.xhtml#section4I05">Section 4I.05</a>)</span>, each accessible pedestrian push<span class="text_added"> </span>button shall be provided with the following features <span class="text_deleted">(see <a href="#section4K11">Sections 4E.11</a> through <a href="#section4K13">4E.13</a>)</span>:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li class="change_from_npa">A push<span class="text_added"> </span>button locator tone,</li>

      <li class="change_from_npa">A <span class="text_added">vibro</span>tactile <span class="text_deleted">arrow</span><span class="text_added">walk indication</span>,</li>

      <li>A speech walk message for the WALKING PERSON (symbolizing WALK) indication<span class="text_added"> (see <a href="#section4K03">Section 4K.03</a>)</span>, and</li>

      <li>A speech push<span class="text_added"> </span>button information message<span class="text_added"> (see <a href="#section4K05">Section 4K.05</a>)</span>.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K02_para04">04</span><span class="standard">If the pedestrian clearance time is sufficient only to cross from the curb or <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">shoulder</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">edge of pavement</span> to a median of sufficient width for pedestrians to wait and accessible pedestrian <span class="text_added change_from_npa">signal </span>detectors are used, an additional accessible pedestrian <span class="text_added change_from_npa">signal </span>detector shall be provided in the median.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4K03">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.11</span><span class="text_added">4K.03</span> <span class="text_deleted">Accessible Pedestrian Signals and Detectors – </span>Walk Indications</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>429. In Section 4K.03 (existing Section 4E.11), retitled, “Walk Indications,” FHWA proposes to revise Standard P7 to clarify the existing requirements for a percussive tone for the audible walk indications. The only exception is for locations with two accessible pedestrian signals on the same corner, or on a median, that are associated with different phases and are located less than 10 feet apart, in which case a speech message is required for the audible walk indication. FHWA proposes this change in accordance with Official Ruling No. 4(09)–3(I) (http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/resources/interpretations/4_09_3.htm).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA proposes to delete the second sentence in Support P14 allowing the use of transmitted speech messages, because there is no assurance that all impacted pedestrians would have a transmitter.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA proposes to remove the second sentence of Standard P17 limiting the use of speech walk messages to specific locations. FHWA proposes this revision to avoid redundancy, since this is addressed in greater detail, in P8.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to change P17 through P20 from Standard to Guidance to provide agencies flexibility in developing speech walk messages.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change of P18 through P20 is adopted as proposed. P17 is retained as Standard for pedestrian safety reasons.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes a new Standard requiring accessible pedestrian signal speech messages in a language other than English to follow the message first stated in English. FHWA proposes this change to establish consistency in the order of such messages when an optional secondary message in a language other than English is used, thereby meeting the expectancy of pedestrians.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para01">01</span><span class="support">Technology that provides different sounds for each non-concurrent signal phase has frequently been found to provide ambiguous information. Research indicates that a rapid <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">tick</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">percussive</span> tone for each crossing coming from accessible pedestrian signal devices on separated poles located close to each crosswalk provides unambiguous information to pedestrians <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">who are blind or visually impaired</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">with vision disabilities</span>. Vibrotactile indications provide information to pedestrians who are blind and deaf and are also used by pedestrians who are blind or who have low vision to confirm the walk signal in noisy situations.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Accessible pedestrian signals shall have both audible and vibrotactile walk indications.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Vibrotactile walk indications shall be provided by a <span class="text_added">vibro</span>tactile arrow <span class="text_added">that is located </span>on the push<span class="text_added"> </span>button <span class="text_added">or on the speaker box </span>(see <span class="text_added change_from_npa"><a href="#section4K04_para01">Paragraph 1</a> in </span><a href="#section4K04">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.12</span><span class="text_added">4K.04</span></a>). <span class="text_deleted">that </span><span class="text_added"> The vibrotactile arrow shall </span>vibrate<span class="text_deleted">s</span> during the walk interval.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para04">04</span><span class="standard">Accessible pedestrian signals shall have an audible walk indication during the walk interval only.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para05">05</span><span class="standard">The audible walk indication shall be audible <span class="text_deleted">from</span><span class="text_added">at</span> the beginning of the associated crosswalk. The accessible walk indication shall have the same duration as the pedestrian walk signal except when the pedestrian signal rests in walk.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">If the pedestrian signal rests in walk, the accessible walk indication should be limited to the first 7 seconds of the walk interval. The accessible walk indication should be recalled by a button press during the walk interval provided that the crossing time remaining is <span class="text_deleted">greater</span><span class="text_added">longer</span> than the pedestrian change interval.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para07">07</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">Where two accessible pedestrian signals are separated by a distance of at least 10 feet, the audible walk indication shall be a percussive tone. </span>Where two accessible pedestrian signals on one corner<span class="text_added">, or in a median, that are associated with different phases </span> are <span class="text_deleted">not separated by a distance of at least</span><span class="text_added">placed less than</span> 10 feet<span class="text_added"> apart</span>, the audible walk indication shall be a speech walk message<span class="text_added"> (see <a href="#section4K02_para03">Paragraph 3</a> in <a href="#section4K02">Section 4K.02</a>). In all other cases, including at midblock crossings, on corners where only one accessible pedestrian signal is present, in a median, and on corners where two accessible pedestrian signals are separated by a distance of at least 10 feet, the audible walk indication shall be a percussive tone</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para08">08</span><span class="standard">Audible tone walk indications shall repeat at eight to ten ticks per second. Audible tones used as walk indications shall consist of multiple frequencies with a dominant component at 880 Hz.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para09">09</span><span class="guidance">The volume of audible walk indications and push<span class="text_added"> </span>button locator tones (see <a href="#section4K04">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.12</span><span class="text_added">4K.04</span></a>) should be set to be a maximum of 5 dBA louder than ambient sound, except when audible beaconing is provided in response to an extended push<span class="text_added"> </span>button press.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para10">10</span><span class="standard">Automatic volume adjustment <span class="text_added">up to a maximum volume of 100dBA </span>in response to ambient traffic sound level shall be provided up<span class="text_deleted"> to a maximum volume of 100 dBA</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para11">11</span><span class="guidance">The sound level of audible walk indications and push<span class="text_added"> </span>button locator tones should be adjusted to be low enough to avoid misleading pedestrians <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">who have visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">with vision</span> disabilities when the following conditions exist:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>Where there is an island that allows unsignalized right turns across a crosswalk between the island and the sidewalk.</li>

      <li>Where multi-leg approaches or complex signal phasing require more than two pedestrian phases, such that it might be unclear which crosswalk is served by each audible tone.</li>

      <li>At intersections where a diagonal pedestrian crossing is allowed, or where one street receives a WALKING PERSON (symbolizing WALK) signal indication simultaneously with another street.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para12">12</span><span class="option">An alert tone, which is a very brief burst of high-frequency sound at the beginning of the audible walk indication that rapidly decays to the frequency of the walk tone, may be used to alert pedestrians to the beginning of the walk interval.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para13">13</span><span class="support">An alert tone can be particularly useful if the walk tone is not easily audible in some traffic conditions.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para14">14</span><span class="support">Speech walk messages communicate to pedestrians which street has the walk interval. <span class="text_deleted">Speech messages might be either directly audible or transmitted, requiring a personal receiver to hear the message. </span>To be a useful system, the words and their meaning need to be correctly understood by all users in the context of the street environment where they are used. Because of this, tones are the preferred means of providing audible walk indications except where two accessible pedestrian signals on one corner are not separated by a distance of at least 10 feet.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para15">15</span><span class="support">If speech walk messages are used, pedestrians have to know the names of the streets that they are crossing in order for the speech walk messages to be unambiguous. In getting directions to travel to a new location, pedestrians with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vision</span> disabilities do not always get the name of each street to be crossed. Therefore, it is desirable to give users of accessible pedestrian signals the name of the street controlled by the pushbutton. This can be done by means of a speech push<span class="text_added"> </span>button information message (see <a href="#section4K05">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.13</span><span class="text_added">4K.05</span></a>) during the flashing or steady UPRAISED HAND intervals, or by raised print and Braille labels on the push<span class="text_added"> </span>button housing.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para16">16</span><span class="support">By combining the information from the push<span class="text_added"> </span>button message or Braille label, the <span class="text_added">vibro</span>tactile arrow aligned in the direction of travel on the relevant crosswalk, and the speech walk message, pedestrians with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vision</span> disabilities are able to correctly respond to speech walk messages even if there are two push<span class="text_added"> </span>buttons on the same pole.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para17">17</span><span class="standard">If speech walk messages are used to communicate the walk interval, they shall provide a clear message that the walk interval is in effect, as well as to which crossing it applies.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/></span><span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para18">18</span><span class="guidance">Speech walk messages that are used at intersections having pedestrian phasing that is concurrent with vehicular phasing <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be patterned after the model: “Broadway. Walk sign is on to cross Broadway.”</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para19">19</span><span class="guidance">Speech walk messages that are used at intersections having exclusive pedestrian phasing <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be patterned after the model: “Walk sign is on for all crossings.”</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para20">20</span><span class="guidance">Speech walk messages <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> not contain any additional information, except they <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> include designations such as “Street” or “Avenue” where this information is necessary to avoid ambiguity at a particular location.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para21">21</span><span class="guidance">Speech walk messages should not state or imply a command to the pedestrian, such as “Cross Broadway now.” Speech walk messages should not tell pedestrians that it is “safe to cross,” because it is always the pedestrian’s responsibility to check actual traffic conditions.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para22">22</span><span class="standard">A speech walk message is not required at times when the walk interval is not timing, but, if provided:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>It shall begin with the term “wait.”</li>

      <li>It need not be repeated for the entire time that the walk interval is not timing.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para23">23</span><span class="standard">If a pilot light (see <a href="part4i.xhtml#section4I06">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.08</span><span class="text_added">4I.06</span></a>) is used at an accessible pedestrian signal location, each actuation shall be accompanied by the speech message “wait.”</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para24">24</span><span class="option">Accessible pedestrian signals that provide speech walk messages may provide similar messages in languages other than English, if needed<span class="text_deleted">, except for the terms “walk sign” and “wait</span>.<span class="text_deleted">”</span></span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K03_para25">25</span><span class="standard">If used, speech walk messages in a language other than English shall be stated first in English, and then repeated in the second language, alternating back and forth while the walk interval is timing.</span></p>
	</span>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K11_para25">25</span><span class="standard">Following the audible walk indication, accessible pedestrian signals shall revert to the pushbutton locator tone (see <a href="#section4K12">Section 4E.12</a>) during the pedestrian change interval.</span></p></span>

    <h3 id="section4K04">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.12</span><span class="text_added">4K.04</span> <span class="text_deleted">Accessible Pedestrian Signals and Detectors – T</span><span class="text_added">Vibrot</span>actile Arrows and Locator Tones</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>430. In Section 4K.04 (existing Section 4E.12), retitled, “Vibrotactile Arrows and Locator Tones,” FHWA proposes to revise P1 and P2 to clarify the requirements for vibrotactile arrows and locator tones to improve safety for pedestrians with visual disabilities.
</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is generally adopted as proposed. Based on comments received, the requirement for the vibrotactile arrow to be located on the push button is removed from the last sentence in P1 regarding locations without push buttons since push buttons are always provided with accessible pedestrian signals.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes a new Option to allow the pushbutton locator tone to default to deactivated mode during periods when the steady UPRAISED HAND is displayed for the associated crosswalk if a passive pedestrian detection system is implemented that activates the locator tone when a pedestrian is present within a 12-foot radius from the push button location, in accordance with Official Ruling No. 4(09)-26(I) (http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/resources/interpretations/4_09_26.htm).
</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>In addition, FHWA proposes to change the second portion of P6 from Standard to Guidance to recommend, rather than require, that pushbutton locator tones to be audible 6 to 12 feet from the pushbutton, or to the building line, whichever is less. FHWA proposes this change to provide agencies additional flexibility in locating pushbutton locator tones and pushbuttons.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K04_para01">01</span><span class="standard">To enable pedestrians <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">who have visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">with vision</span> disabilities to distinguish and locate the appropriate push<span class="text_added"> </span>button at an accessible pedestrian signal location, <span class="text_added"> and to help them align with the crosswalk, each </span>push<span class="text_added"> </span>button<span class="text_deleted">s</span> shall clearly indicate by means of <span class="text_added">a vibro</span>tactile arrow<span class="text_deleted">s</span> which crosswalk signal is actuated by <span class="text_deleted">each</span><span class="text_added">the </span> push<span class="text_added"> </span>button. <span class="text_deleted">T</span><span class="text_added">Vibrot</span>actile arrows shall be located on the <span class="text_added">button of the </span>push<span class="text_added"> </span>button<span class="text_added"> assembly<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> or immediately adjacent to the button on the same surface of the push button assembly housing</span></span>, <span class="text_added">shall </span>have high visual contrast (light on dark or dark on light), and shall be aligned parallel to the direction of travel on the associated crosswalk.<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added"> If a push button is not provided for pedestrian detection or to activate the accessible pedestrian signal features, the vibrotactile arrow shall be located on the speaker box, and the speaker box shall be located in compliance with Section 4I.06.</span></span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K04_para02">02</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">An accessible pedestrian pushbutton shall incorporate a</span><span class="text_added">A</span> locator tone<span class="text_added"> shall be incorporated into the accessible pedestrian signal equipment to help pedestrians with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vision</span> disabilities locate the <span class="text_added change_from_npa">vibro</span>tactile arrow, and the associated push button if a push button is provided</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K04_para03">03</span><span class="support">A push<span class="text_added"> </span>button locator tone is a repeating sound that informs approaching pedestrians that a push<span class="text_added"> </span>button to actuate pedestrian timing or receive additional information exists, and that enables pedestrians with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vision</span> disabilities to locate the push<span class="text_added"> </span>button.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K04_para04">04</span><span class="standard">Push<span class="text_added"> </span>button locator tones shall have a duration of 0.15 seconds or less, and <span class="text_added">except as provided in <a href="#section4K04_para05">Paragraph 5</a><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> of this Section</span>, push button locator <span class="text_added change_from_npa">tones </span></span>shall repeat at 1-second intervals<span class="text_added"> at all times that the audible walk indication is not active, including during the pedestrian change interval and during the time that the pedestrian signal is resting in walk (see <a href="#section4K03_para06">Paragraph 6</a> in <a href="#section4K03">Section 4K.03</a>)</span>.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K04_para05">05</span><span class="option">The push button locator tone may default to a deactivated mode during periods when the steady UPRAISED HAND (symbolozing DONT WALK) signal indication is being displayed for the associated crosswalk if a passive pedestrian detection system is implemented that activates the locator tone at all times (other than when the audible walk indication is active) that a pedestrian is present within a 12-foot radius from the push button location. Where pedestrian facilities (such as sidewalks) are present, the passive detection requirement may be reduced such that it only applies to pedestrians who are on the pedestrian facilities within the 12-foot radius from the push button location.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/></span><span class="paranum" id="section4K04_para06">06</span><span class="standard">Push<span class="text_added"> </span>button locator tones shall be deactivated when the traffic control signal <span class="text_added">or pedestrian hybrid beacon </span>is operating in a flashing mode. This requirement shall not apply to traffic control signals or pedestrian hybrid beacons that are activated from a flashing or dark mode to a <span class="text_added">steady (</span>stop-and-go<span class="text_added">)</span> mode by pedestrian actuations.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K04_para07">07</span><span class="standard">Push<span class="text_added"> </span>button locator tones shall be intensity responsive to ambient sound<span class="text_deleted">, and be audible 6 to 12 feet from the pushbutton, or to the building line, whichever is less</span>.</span></p>

	<p><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section4K04_para08">08</span><span class="guidance">Push button locator tones should be audible 6 to 12 feet from the push button, or to the building line, whichever is less.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K04_para09">09</span><span class="support"><a href="#section4K03">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.11</span><span class="text_added">4K.03</span></a> contains additional provisions regarding the volume and sound level of push<span class="text_added"> </span>button locator tones.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4K05">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.13</span><span class="text_added">4K.05</span> <span class="text_deleted">Accessible Pedestrian Signals and Detectors – </span>Extended Push<span class="text_deleted">b</span><span class="text_added"> B</span>utton Press Features</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>431. In Section 4K.05 (existing Section 4E.13), retitled,
“Extended Push Button Press Features,” FHWA proposes to change P7 from Option to Guidance to recommend that audible beaconing be initiated by an extended pushbutton press. FHWA makes this change to provide more consistent applications of audible beaconing.
</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to add a value of 100 dBA for the maximum volume of the pushbutton locator tone during the pedestrian change interval and to require that the loudspeaker be mounted at the far end of the crosswalk at a height of 7 to 10 feet above the pavement. FHWA proposes this change to be consistent with existing provisions for accessible pedestrian signals in Section 4E.11, which are based on “NCHRP 3–62 Accessible Pedestrian Signals: A Guide to Best Practices” (http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_w117a.pdf).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed with an editorial revision based on comments that the word “up” was inadvertently left out of the sentence. FHWA intended to propose to add a value up to 100 dBA for the maximum volume.</p>

	<p>Further, FHWA proposes to add a new Guidance paragraph recommending that the audible beaconing loudspeaker at the far end of the crosswalk should be within the width of the crosswalk.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>In addition, FHWA proposes to add an Option to permit the sound level of the accessible pedestrian signal walk indication and subsequent pushbutton locator tone to be increased by an extended pushbutton press.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA proposes these changes to improve accessible pedestrian signals for pedestrians with vision disabilities.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">In addition, a Standard is added requiring a PUSH BUTTON FOR 2 SECONDS FOR EXTRA CROSSING TIME (R10-32P) plaque adjacent to the pedestrian push button detector if additional crossing time is provided by means of an extended push button press. This is the same requirement that is included in Section 4I.05 but repeated here.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para01">01</span><span class="option">Pedestrians may be provided with additional features such as increased crossing time, audible beaconing, or a speech push<span class="text_added"> </span>button information message as a result of an extended push<span class="text_added"> </span>button press.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para02">02</span><span class="standard">If an extended push<span class="text_added"> </span>button press <span class="text_added">(see <a href="part4i.xhtml#section4I06_para18">Paragraph 18</a> in <a href="part4i.xhtml#section4I06">Section 4I.06</a>) </span>is used to provide any additional feature(s), a push<span class="text_added"> </span>button press of less than one second shall actuate only the pedestrian timing and any associated accessible walk indication, and a push<span class="text_added"> </span>button press of one second or more shall actuate the pedestrian timing, any associated accessible walk indication, and any additional feature(s).</span></p>

    <div class="change_from_npa"><p><span class="paranum" id="section4K13_para03">03</span><span class="standard">If additional crossing time is provided by means of an extended push<span class="text_added"> </span>button press, a PUSH BUTTON FOR 2 SECONDS FOR EXTRA CROSSING TIME (R10-32P) plaque (see <span class="text_deleted"><a href="part2b.xhtml#figure2B26">Figure 2B-26</a></span><span class="text_added"><a href="part4i.xhtml#section4I05">Section 4I.05</a></span>) shall be <span class="text_deleted">mounted</span><span class="text_added">installed</span> adjacent to <span class="text_deleted">or integral with </span>the pedestrian push<span class="text_added"> </span>button<span class="text_added"> detector</span>.</span></p>
</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para03">03</span><span class="support">Audible beaconing is the use of an audible signal in such a way that pedestrians with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vision</span> disabilities can home in on the signal that is located on the far end of the crosswalk as they cross the street.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para04">04</span><span class="support">Not all crosswalks at an intersection need audible beaconing<span class="text_deleted">; audible beaconing can actually cause confusion if used at all crosswalks at some intersections</span>. Audible beaconing is not appropriate at locations with channelized turns or split phasing, because of the possibility of confusion.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">Audible beaconing should <span class="text_deleted">only </span>be considered following an engineering study at:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>Crosswalks longer than 70 feet, unless <span class="text_deleted">they</span><span class="text_added">those crosswalks</span> are divided by a median that has another accessible pedestrian signal with a locator tone;</li>

      <li>Crosswalks that are skewed;</li>

      <li>Intersections with irregular geometry, such as more than four legs;</li>

      <li>Crosswalks where audible beaconing is requested by <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">an individual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">a person</span> with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vision</span> disabilities; or</li>

      <li>Other locations where a study indicates audible beaconing would be beneficial.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para06">06</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted">A</span><span class="text_added">If a</span>udible beaconing <span class="text_deleted">may</span><span class="text_added">is used, it should</span> be <span class="text_deleted">provided in several ways, any of which are </span>initiated by an extended push<span class="text_added"> </span>button press. </span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para07">07</span><span class="standard">If audible beaconing is used, the volume of the push<span class="text_added"> </span>button locator tone during the pedestrian change interval of the called pedestrian phase shall be increased <span class="text_added change_from_npa">up </span><span class="text_added">to a maximum of 100 dBA, </span>and <span class="text_deleted">operated in one of the following ways:</span><span class="text_added">shall come from a loudspeaker that is mounted at the far end of the crosswalk at a height of 7 to 10 feet above the pavement.</span></span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>The louder audible walk indication and louder locator tone comes from the far end of the crosswalk, as pedestrians cross the street,</li>

      <li>The louder locator tone comes from both ends of the crosswalk, or</li>

      <li>The louder locator tone comes from an additional speaker that is aimed at the center of the crosswalk and that is mounted on a pedestrian signal head.</li>
    </ol></span>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para08">08</span><span class="guidance">The audible beaconing loudspeaker mounted at the far end of the crosswalk should be within the width of the crosswalk.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para09">09</span><span class="support">When the locator tone is active during the pedestrian change interval at a traffic control signal or pedestrian hybrid beacon where audible beaconing is used, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">both</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">the locator tone from</span> the audible beaconing loudspeaker <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">and the accessible pedestrian signal emit the tone</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">is at an elevated volume, while the locator tone from the accessible pedestrian signal is at its normal, quiet setting</span>.</span></p>
	</span>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para10">10</span><span class="option"><span class="text_added">The sound level of the accessible pedestrian <span class="text_added change_from_npa">signal </span>walk indication and subsequent push button locator tone may be increased by an extended push button press.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para11">11</span><span class="option">Speech push<span class="text_added"> </span>button information messages may provide intersection identification, as well as information about unusual intersection signalization and geometry, such as notification regarding exclusive pedestrian phasing, leading pedestrian intervals, split phasing, diagonal crosswalks, and medians or islands.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para12">12</span><span class="standard">If speech push<span class="text_added"> </span>button information messages are made available by actuating the accessible pedestrian signal detector, they shall only be actuated when the walk interval is not timing. They shall begin with the term “Wait,” followed by intersection identification information modeled after: “Wait to cross Broadway at Grand.” If information on intersection signalization or geometry is also given, it shall follow the intersection identification information.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para13">13</span><span class="guidance">Speech push<span class="text_added"> </span>button information messages should not be used to provide landmark information or to inform pedestrians with <span class="text_deleted">visual</span><span class="text_added">vision</span> disabilities about detours or temporary traffic control situations.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4K05_para14">14</span><span class="support">Additional information on the structure and wording of speech push<span class="text_added"> </span>button information messages is included in <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">ITE’s</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">the Institute of Transportation Engineers'</span> “Electronic Toolbox for Making Intersections More Accessible for Pedestrians Who Are Blind or Visually Impaired<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">.</span>”<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> which is available at ITE’s website (see Page i). </span></span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>