<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 6J - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="content">

	<span class="text_added">
	<h1>Chapter 6J. TTC Zone Pavement Markings</h1>
	</span>
	

    <h3 id="section6J01">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.77</span><span class="text_added">6J.01</span> Pavement Markings<span class="text_added"> in TTC Zones</span></h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>493. In Section 6J.01 (existing Section 6F.77) Pavement Markings in TTC Zones, FHWA proposes to change the first two sentences of P4 from Standard to Guidance, because “as soon as practical” is not defined and obliteration of pavement markings cannot always be complete and without significant scarring.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">This change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Pavement markings are installed or existing markings are maintained or enhanced in TTC zones to provide road users with a clearly defined path for travel through the TTC zone in day, night, and twilight periods under both wet and dry pavement conditions.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J01_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">The work should be planned and staged to provide for the placement and removal of the pavement markings in a way that minimizes the disruption to traffic flow approaching and through the TTC zone during the placement and removal process.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J01_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Existing pavement markings shall be maintained in all long-term stationary (see <a href="part6n.xhtml#section6N01">Section <span class="text_deleted">6G.02</span><span class="text_added">6N.01</span></a>) TTC zones in accordance with <a href="part3a.xhtml">Chapters 3A</a> and <a href="part3b.xhtml">3B</a>, except as otherwise provided for temporary pavement markings in <a href="#section6J02">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.78</span><span class="text_added">6J.02</span></a>. Pavement markings shall match the alignment of the markings in place at both ends of the TTC zone. Pavement markings shall be placed along the entire length of any paved detour or temporary roadway prior to the detour or roadway being opened to road users.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6J01_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">For long-term stationary operations, pavement markings in the temporary traveled way that are no longer applicable <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be removed or obliterated as soon as practical. Pavement marking obliteration <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> remove the non-applicable pavement marking material, and the obliteration method <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> minimize pavement scarring.</span></p>

	<p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6J01_para05">05</span><span class="standard">Painting over existing pavement markings with black paint or spraying with asphalt shall not be accepted as a substitute for removal or obliteration.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J01_para06">06</span><span class="option">Removable, non-reflective, preformed tape that is approximately the same color as the pavement surface may be used where markings need to be covered temporarily.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6J02">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.78</span><span class="text_added">6J.02</span> Temporary Markings</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J02_para01">01</span><span class="support">Temporary markings are those pavement markings or devices that are placed within TTC zones to provide road users with a clearly defined path of travel through the TTC zone when the permanent markings are either removed or obliterated during the work activities. Temporary markings are typically needed during the reconstruction of a road while it is open to traffic, such as overlays or surface treatments or where lanes are temporarily shifted on pavement that is to remain in place.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Unless justified based on engineering judgment, temporary pavement markings should not remain in place for more than 14 daysafter the application of the pavement surface treatment or the construction of the final pavement surface on new roadways or over existing pavements.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6J02_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The temporary use of edge lines, channelizing lines, lane-reduction transitions, gore markings, and other longitudinal markings, and the various non-longitudinal markings (such as stop lines, railroad crossings, crosswalks, words, symbols, or arrows) should be in accordance with the State’s or highway agency’s policy.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J02_para04">04</span><span class="standard">Warning signs, channelizing devices, and delineation shall be used to indicate required road user paths in TTC zones where it is not possible to provide a clear path by pavement markings.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6J02_para05">05</span><span class="standard">Except as otherwise provided in this Section, all temporary pavement markings for no-passing zones shall comply with the requirements of Chapters 3A and 3B. All temporary broken-line pavement markings shall use the same cycle length as permanent markings and shall have line segments that are at least 2 feet long.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J02_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">All pavement markings and devices used to delineate road user paths should be reviewed during daytime and nighttime periods.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J02_para07">07</span><span class="option">Half-cycle lengths with a minimum of 2-foot stripes may be used on roadways with severe curvature (see <a href="part3a.xhtml#section3A04">Section 3A.<span class="text_deleted">06</span><span class="text_added">04</span></a>) for broken line center lines in passing zones and for lane lines.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6J02_para08">08</span><span class="option">For temporary situations of 14 days or less, for a two- or three-lane road, no-passing zones may be identified by using DO NOT PASS (R4-1), PASS WITH CARE (R4-2), and NO PASSING ZONE (W14-3) signs (see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B36">Sections 2B.<span class="text_deleted">28</span><span class="text_added">36</span></a>, <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B37">2B.<span class="text_deleted">29</span><span class="text_added">37</span></a>, and <a href="part2c.xhtml#section2C53">2C.<span class="text_deleted">45</span><span class="text_added">53</span></a>) rather than pavement markings. Also, DO NOT PASS, PASS WITH CARE, and NO PASSING ZONE signs may be used instead of pavement markings on roads with low volumes for longer periods in accordance with the State’s or highway agency’s policy.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J02_para09">09</span><span class="guidance">If used, the DO NOT PASS, PASS WITH CARE, and NO PASSING ZONE signs should be placed in accordance with <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B36">Sections 2B.<span class="text_deleted">28</span><span class="text_added">36</span></a>, <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B37">2B.<span class="text_deleted">29</span><span class="text_added">37</span></a>, and <a href="part2c.xhtml#section2C53">2C.<span class="text_deleted">45</span><span class="text_added">53</span></a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6J02_para10">10</span><span class="guidance">If used, the NO CENTER LINE sign should be placed in accordance with <a href="part6h.xhtml#section6H29">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.47</span><span class="text_added">6H.29</span></a>.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6J03">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.79</span><span class="text_added">6J.03</span> Temporary Raised Pavement Markers</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>494. In Section 6J.03 (existing Section 6F.79) Temporary Raised Pavement Markers, FHWA proposes to revise the required spacing for temporary raised pavement markers in P3 and P4 to simplify layout in the field by providing specific distances rather than equations.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">This change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J03_para01">01</span><span class="option">Retroreflective or internally illuminated raised pavement markers, or non-retroreflective raised pavement markers supplemented by retroreflective or internally illuminated markers, may be substituted for markings of other types in TTC zones.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J03_para02">02</span><span class="standard">If used, the color and pattern of the raised pavement markers shall simulate the color and pattern of the markings for which they substitute.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6J03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">If temporary raised pavement markers are used to substitute for broken line segments, a group of at least three retroreflective markers <span class="text_deleted">shall be </span>equally spaced at no greater than <span class="text_deleted">N/8 (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B14">Section 3B.14</a>)</span><span class="text_added">5 feet shall be installed every 40 feet</span>.<span class="text_deleted"> The value of N for a broken or dotted line shall equal the length of one line segment plus one gap.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6J03_para04">04</span><span class="standard">If temporary raised pavement markers are used to substitute for solid lines, the markers shall be equally spaced at no greater than <span class="text_deleted">N/4</span><span class="text_added">10 feet</span>, with retroreflective or internally illuminated units at a spacing no greater than <span class="text_deleted">N/2</span><span class="text_added">20 feet</span>.<span class="text_deleted"> The value of N referenced for solid lines shall equal the N for the broken or dotted lines that might be adjacent to or might extend the solid lines (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B11">Section 3B.11</a>). </span></span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J03_para05">05</span><span class="option">Temporary raised pavement markers may be used to substitute for broken line segments by using at least two retroreflective markers placed at each end of a segment of 2 to 5 feet in length, using the same cycle length as permanent markings.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/><span class="text_deleted"> <span class="guidance">Temporary raised pavement markers used on 2- to 5-foot segments to substitute for broken line segments should not be in place for more than 14 days unless justified by engineering judgment.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6J03_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Raised pavement markers should be considered for use along surfaced detours or temporary roadways, and other changed or new travel-lane alignments.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J03_para07">07</span><span class="option">Retroreflective or internally illuminated raised pavement markers, or non-retroreflective raised pavement markers supplemented by retroreflective or internally illuminated markers, may also be used in TTC zones to supplement markings as prescribed in <a href="part3a.xhtml">Chapters 3A</a> and <a href="part3b.xhtml">3B</a>.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6J04">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.80</span><span class="text_added">6J.04</span> Delineators</h3>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J04_para01">01</span><span class="option">Delineators may be used in TTC zones to indicate the alignment of the roadway and to outline the required vehicle path through the TTC zone.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J04_para02">02</span><span class="standard">When used, delineators shall combine with or supplement other TTC devices<span class="text_added"> and shall be in accordance with <a href="part3g.xhtml">Chapter 3G</a></span>. <span class="text_deleted">They shall be mounted on crashworthy supports so that the reflecting unit is approximately 4 feet above the near roadway edge. The standard color for delineators used along both sides of two-way streets and highways and the right-hand side of one-way roadways shall be white. Delineators used along the left-hand side of one-way roadways shall be yellow.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6J04_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Spacing along roadway curves should be as set forth in <a href="part3g.xhtml#section3G04">Section 3<span class="text_deleted">F</span><span class="text_added">G</span>.04</a> and should be such that several delineators are <span class="text_deleted">constantly </span>visible to <span class="text_deleted">the</span><span class="text_added">an approaching</span> driver.</span></p>
    
  </div>
</body>
</html>