<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 6E - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <span class="text_added"><h1>Chapter 6E. One-Lane, Two-Way Traffic Control</h1></span>

    <h3 id="section6E01">Section <span class="text_deleted">6C.10</span><span class="text_added">6E.01</span> One-Lane, Two-Way Traffic Control<span class="text_added"> -- General</span></h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E01_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Except as provided in Paragraph <span class="text_deleted">5</span><span class="text_added">4</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> of this Section</span>, when traffic in both directions must use a single lane for a limited distance, movements from each end shall be coordinated.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E01_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Provisions should be made for alternate one-way movement through the constricted section via methods such as flagger control, a flag transfer, a pilot car, traffic control signals, or stop or yield control.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6E01_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Control points at each end should be chosen to permit easy passing of opposing lanes of vehicles.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance">If traffic on the affected one-lane roadway is not visible from one end to the other, then flagging procedures, a pilot car with a flagger used as described in <a href="#section6C13">Section 6C.13</a>, or a traffic control signal should be used to control opposing traffic flows.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E01_para04">04</span><span class="option">If the work space on a low-volume street or road is short and road users from both directions are able to see the traffic approaching from the opposite direction through and beyond the worksite, the movement of traffic through a one-lane, two-way constriction may be self-regulating.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6E02">Section <span class="text_deleted">6C.11</span><span class="text_added">6E.02</span> Flagger Method<span class="text_deleted"> of One-Lane, Two-Way Traffic Control</span></h3>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E02_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Except as provided in <a href="#section6E02_para02">Paragraph 2</a><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> of this Section</span>, traffic should be controlled by a flagger at each end of a constricted section of roadway. One of the flaggers should be designated as the coordinator. To provide coordination of the control of the traffic, the flaggers should be able to communicate with each other orally, electronically, or with manual signals. These manual signals should not be mistaken for flagging signals.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E02_para02">02</span><span class="option">When a one-lane, two-way TTC zone is short enough to allow a flagger to see from one end of the zone to the other, traffic may be controlled by either a single flagger or by a flagger at each end of the section.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E02_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">When a single flagger is used, the flagger should be stationed on the shoulder opposite the constriction or work space, or in a position where good visibility and traffic control can be maintained at all times. When good visibility and traffic control cannot be maintained by one flagger station, traffic should be controlled by a flagger at each end of the section.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6E03">Section <span class="text_deleted">6C.12</span><span class="text_added">6E.03</span> Flag Transfer Method<span class="text_deleted"> of One-Lane, Two-Way Traffic Control</span></h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E03_para01">01</span><span class="support">The driver of the last vehicle proceeding into the one-lane section is given a red flag (or other token) and instructed to deliver it to the flagger at the other end. The opposite flagger, upon receipt of the flag, then knows that traffic can be permitted to move in the other direction. A variation of this method is to replace the use of a flag with an official pilot car that follows the last road user vehicle proceeding through the section.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E03_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">The flag transfer method should be employed only where the one-way traffic is confined to a relatively short length of a road, usually no more than 1 mile in length.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6E04">Section <span class="text_deleted">6C.13</span><span class="text_added">6E.04</span> Pilot Car Method<span class="text_deleted"> of One-Lane, Two-Way Traffic Control</span></h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>478. In Section 6E.04 (existing Section 6C.13) Pilot Car Method, FHWA proposes to revise the Standard statement to allow mounting of the sign on top of the pilot vehicle as well as on the rear, and to clarify that pilot car operations shall be coordinated with flagging or other control methods, as this is necessary for safety.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to add a new Standard to require a flagger to operate an Automated Flagger Assistance Device (AFAD) in pilot car operations based on Official Ruling No. 6(09)–15(I) (<a href="https://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/resources/interpretations/6_09_15.htm">https://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/resources/interpretations/6_09_15.htm</a>) to clarify that an AFAD is not a temporary traffic control signal and should not be operated in an automatic manner.
</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">These changes are adopted as proposed, except that based on comment, clarification is added that the flagger operating the AFAD cannot be in the pilot vehicle, and a recommendation is added that signing should be considered if temporary traffic control signals are used and wait times might be long.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E04_para01">01</span><span class="option">A pilot car may be used to guide a queue of vehicles through the TTC zone or detour.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E04_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">The pilot car should have the name of the contractor or contracting authority prominently displayed.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E04_para03">03</span><span class="standard">The PILOT CAR FOLLOW ME (G20-4) sign <span class="text_deleted">(see <a href="part6h.xhtml#section6F58">Section 6F.58</a>) </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">(see <a href ="part4h.xhtml#section4H01">Figure 6H-1</a>) </span>shall be mounted on <span class="text_added">the top or on </span>the rear of the pilot vehicle<span class="text_added"> (see <a href="part6h.xhtml#section6H37">Section 6H.37</a>)</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6E04_para04">04</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">A flagger shall be stationed on the approach to the activity area to control vehicular traffic until the pilot vehicle is available.</span><span class="text_added">The pilot car operation shall be coordinated with flagging operations or other methods of control at each end of the one lane section of the work zone.</span></span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6E04_para05">05</span><span class="standard">If an Automated Flagger Assistance Device (AFAD) <span class="text_added change_from_npa">(see <a href ="part6l.xhtml#section6L02">Section 6L.02</a>) </span>is used in pilot car operations, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">it</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">the AFAD</span> shall be operated by a flagger<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> positioned near and within the line of sight of the AFAD</span>.<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> The AFAD shall not be left unattended at any time that the AFAD is being used.</span></span></p>
	</span>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E04_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">If temporary traffic control signals are used in pilot car operations and long wait times will be encountered by road users, consideration should be given to using signs to notify drivers of the wait time and/or pilot car operation, based on engineering judgment.</span></p>
	</span></div>

    <h3 id="section6E05">Section <span class="text_deleted">6C.14</span><span class="text_added">6E.05</span> Temporary Traffic Control Signal Method<span class="text_deleted"> of One-Lane, Two-Way Traffic Control</span></h3>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E05_para01">01</span><span class="option">Traffic control signals may be used to control vehicular traffic movements in one-lane, two-way TTC zones (see <a href="part6p.xhtml#figure6P12">Figure 6<span class="text_deleted">H</span><span class="text_added">P</span>-12</a> and <a href="part4o.xhtml">Chapter 4<span class="text_deleted">H</span><span class="text_added">O</span></a>).</span></p>

    <h3 id="section6E06">Section <span class="text_deleted">6C.15</span><span class="text_added">6E.06</span> Stop or Yield Control Method<span class="text_deleted"> of One-Lane, Two-Way Traffic Control</span></h3>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E06_para01">01</span><span class="option">STOP or YIELD signs may be used to control traffic on low-volume roads at a one-lane, two-way TTC zone when drivers are able to see the other end of the one-lane, two-way operation and have sufficient visibility of approaching vehicles.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6E06_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">If the STOP or YIELD sign is installed for only one direction, then the STOP or YIELD sign should face road users who are driving on the side of the roadway that is closed for the work activity area.</span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>