<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 1A - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
	<div class="npa">
	<p>2. In the proposed consolidated Part 1, FHWA proposes to reorganize the retained material from the existing Introduction and existing Part 1 into four new chapters, to create a more logical flow of information and make it easier for users to find the content they need. The four chapters of the new Part 1 are Chapter 1A (General), Chapter 1B (Legal Requirements for Traffic Control Devices), Chapter 1C (Definitions, Acronyms, and Abbreviations Used In This Manual), and Chapter 1D (Provisions Applicable to Traffic Control Devices in General).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The reorganization is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <h1>Chapter 1A. General</h1>

    <h3><span class="text_added" id="section1A01">Section 1A.01 Purpose of the MUTCD</span></h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>3. In Chapter 1A General, FHWA proposes to create Section 1A.01, titled, “Purpose of the MUTCD,” with new text recommended by Item 525 of the 20-Year Vision and Strategic Plan for the MUTCD. (<a href="https://ncutcd.org/wp-content/uploads/MUTCD/MUTCD-20-Year-Vision-NCUTCD-Appvd-1-9-14-FINAL.pdf">http://ncutcd.org/wp-content/uploads/MUTCD/ MUTCD-20-Year-Vision-NCUTCD-Appvd-1-9-14- FINAL.pdf</a>). FHWA proposes this revision because a clear statement of the MUTCD’s purpose is critical in defining what content should be in the MUTCD and how that content should be used.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The new section is adopted as proposed, with editorial modifications to emphasize safety, inclusion, and mobility for all road users.  Also, two Support paragraphs from proposed Section 1D.03 are relocated to this section with some revisions, and consolidated into a single paragraph, because this is a more appropriate location for that text.</p>
	</div>

    <span class="text_added"> 

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A01_para01">01</span><span class="support">The purpose of the MUTCD is to establish <span class="text_added change_from_npa">uniform </span>national criteria for the use of traffic control devices that meet the needs and expectancy of road users on all streets, highways, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">bikeways</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">pedestrian and bicycles facilities</span>, and site roadways open to public travel.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1A01_para02">02</span><span class="support">This purpose is achieved through the following objectives:</span></p>
    <ol type="A" class="support">
		<li>Promote safety<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> and efficiency through appropriate use of traffic control devices.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, inclusion, and mobility for all users of the road network;</span></li>
      <li>Promote <span class="text_added change_from_npa">efficiency through creating </span>national uniformity in the meaning and appearance of traffic control devices<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">;</span></li>

      <li>Promote national consistency in the use, installation, and operation of traffic control devices<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">; and</span></li>

      <li>Provide basic principles for traffic engineers to use in making decisions regarding the use, installation, operation, maintenance, and removal of traffic control devices.</li>
    </ol>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1A01_para03">03</span><span class="support">Uniformity of the meaning of traffic control devices is vital to their effectiveness. Uniformity means treating similar situations in a similar way. Uniformity of devices simplifies the task of the road user because it aids in recognition and understanding, thereby reducing perception/reaction time. Uniformity assists road users, law enforcement officers, and traffic courts by giving everyone the same interpretation. Uniformity assists public highway officials through efficiency in manufacture, installation, maintenance, and administration.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1A01_para04">04</span><span class="support">The user of uniform traffic control devices also requires uniform and appropriate application.</span></p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A01_para05">05</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">A</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">The a</span>pplicability of the MUTCD to facilities open to public travel is independent of the type of ownership or jurisdiction (public or private) and the source of funding (Federal, State, local, or private).</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A01_para06">06</span><span class="support">This Manual presumes <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the user of the MUTCD has </span>sufficient working knowledge, professional training and experience, and education in the principles of <span class="text_added change_from_npa">traffic </span>engineering. Other resources can be consulted to understand the basis for decision that are made in which engineering study or judgment will be applied.</span></p>

    </span> 

    <h3 id="section1A02">Section 1A.0<span class="text_deleted">1</span><span class="text_added">2</span> <span class="text_deleted">Purpose of </span>Traffic Control Devices<span class="text_added"> - <span class="change_from_npa">General </span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Definition</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Description</span></span></h3>

    <div class="npa">
	<p>4. In  Section  1A.02  (existing  Section  1A.01),  FHWA proposes to retitle the section to “Traffic Control Devices—Definition.”  FHWA  also  proposes  to change the Standard (relocated from the Introduction, Paragraph 1) to Support, restating and referring to the definition of “traffic control devices” (as proposed to be revised in Section 1C.02).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The section title is adopted as “Traffic Control Devices—General Description” because the definition is located in Section 1C.02 and not here. The change of P1 from Standard to Support is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to add a new Support paragraph about infrastructure elements and certain operational devices, to explain that these are not considered traffic control devices. FHWA proposes these revisions to align proposed content and material being relocated from the Introduction and from other sections within existing Part 1.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The new paragraph is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to include a new list item (labeled “F”), stating that messages displayed on changeable message signs for America’s Missing: Broadcast  Emergency  Response  (AMBER)  alerts and homeland security information during declared states of emergency are not being considered as traffic control devices and, therefore, provisions regarding their design and use are not included in the MUTCD. FHWA proposes this revision because these two types of messages are specific exceptions to the use of a traffic control device expressly allowed by statute. They are referenced in the MUTCD because the device on which they are displayed is a traffic control device, even though the specific messages are not traffic control device messages.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The proposed addition of Item F is not adopted, because of conflicts with other provisions in the MUTCD that allow this type of message on CMS and prescribe certain requirements or other criteria.</p>

	<p>Lastly, FHWA proposes to relocate the Standard and Support pertaining to advertising to Section 1D.09. FHWA proposes this revision to align proposed content and material in each Section.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The relocation is adopted, but to Section 1D.07 instead of 1D.09.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="support">Traffic control devices notify road users of regulations and provide warning and guidance needed for the uniform and efficient operation of all elements of the traffic stream in a manner intended to minimize the occurrences of crashes.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span><span class="support"><span class="text_added"><span class="label">Support:</span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A02_para01">01</span> <span class="support"><span class="text_added">As defined in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> of this Manual</span>, </span><span class="text_deleted">T</span><span class="text_added">t</span>raffic control devices <span class="text_deleted">shall be defined</span><span class="text_added">include</span> as all signs, signals, markings, <span class="text_added">channelizing devices, </span><span class="text_deleted">and</span><span class="text_added">or</span> other devices <span class="text_added">that use color<span class="text_added change_from_npa">s</span>, shapes, symbols, words, sounds, and/or tactile information for the primary purpose of communcating a </span><span class="text_deleted">used to</span> regulat<span class="text_deleted">e</span><span class="text_added">ory</span>, warn<span class="text_added">ing</span>, or guid<span class="text_added">ance message to road users on</span><span class="text_deleted">e traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to</span> a street, highway, pedestrian facility, bikeway, <span class="text_added">pathway<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> </span>or <span class="text_deleted">private road</span><span class="text_added">site roadway</span> open to public travel<span class="text_deleted"> (see definition in Section 1A.13) by authority of a public agency or official having jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road, by authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction</span>.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added"><p><span class="paranum" id="section1A02_para02">02</span><span class="support">Infrastructure elements that restrict the road user's travel paths or vehicle speeds, such as <span class="text_added change_from_npa">islands, </span>curbs, speed humps, and other raised roadway surfaces, are not traffic control devices. <span class="text_added change_from_npa">Transverse or longitudinal rumble strips are also not traffic control devices. </span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Certain </span>Operational devices associated with the application of traffic control strategies<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span> such as <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">in-vehicle electronics, </span>fencing, roadway lighting, barriers, and attenuators are shown in this Manual for context, but their design, application, and usage are not specified since they are not traffic control devices.</span></p></span>
	
    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A02_para03">03</span><span class="support">Certain types of signs and other devices that do not have any traffic control purpose are sometimes placed within the highway right-of-way by or with the permission of the public agency or the official having jurisdiction over the street or highway. <span class="text_deleted">Most of these signs and other devices are not intended for use by road users in general, and their message is only important to individuals who have been instructed in their meanings. </span>These signs and other devices are not considered to be traffic control devices and provisions regarding their design and use are not included in this Manual. Among these signs and other devices are the following:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Devices whose purpose is to assist highway maintenance personnel<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">. Examples include</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, such as</span> markers to guide snowplow operators, devices that identify culvert and drop inlet locations, and devices that precisely identify highway locations for maintenance or mowing purposes<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">;</span></li>

      <li>Devices whose purpose is to assist fire or law enforcement personnel<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">. Examples include</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, such as</span> markers that identify fire hydrant locations, signs that identify fire or water district boundaries, speed measurement pavement markings, small indicator lights to assist in enforcement of red light violations, and photo enforcement systems<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">;</span></li>

      <li>Devices whose purpose is to assist utility company personnel and highway contractors, such as markers that identify underground utility locations<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">;</span></li>

      <li>Signs posting local non-traffic ordinances<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">; and</span></li>

      <li>Signs giving civic organization meeting information.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa">      
	<span class="text_deleted"><span class="text_added">

      <li>Messages displayed on changeable message signs for America's Missing: Broadcast Emergency Repsonse (AMBER) alerts and homeland security information during declared states of emergency (see Section 2L of this Manual for specific provisions and limitations).</li>

      </span></span>
	</div>
    </ol>
    
    <span class="text_added">
	<h3 id="section1A03">Section 1A.03 Target Road Users</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>5. FHWA proposes to add a new Section 1A.03, titled,
“Target Road Users,” with new text recommended by Item 526 of the 20-Year Vision and Strategic Plan for the MUTCD (<a href="https://ncutcd.org/wp-content/uploads/MUTCD/MUTCD-20-Year-Vision-NCUTCD-Appvd-1-9-14-FINAL.pdf">http://ncutcd.org/wp-content/uploads/MUTCD/ MUTCD-20-Year-Vision-NCUTCD-Appvd-1-9-14- FINAL.pdf</a>). The proposed text describes the characteristics of the two groups of target road users for  traffic  control  devices—operators  of  vehicles (including bicyclists) and pedestrians. FHWA proposes this revision because proper use of traffic control devices can be optimized by stating the expectations for road users responding to the traffic control devices.
</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The proposed new Section is adopted but with different text than was proposed to address comments.  Many commenters did not support the proposed definitions of target road users, specifically the “reasonable and prudent” and in the definition of vehicle operators and “alert and attentive” users acting “in a lawful manner” in the definition of pedestrians. Commenters argue that the proposed language failed to acknowledge that human error is inevitable and is thus inconsistent with principles of “Vision Zero” and Safe System Approach. Some commenters stated that the proposed new definition of operators was incompatible with common highway engineering practices that target unlawful, impaired, fatigued, drowsy and inattentive operators. Some commenters stated that the proposed new definition of pedestrians presented an equity concern as it removed the burden of designers to design for road users of all ages and abilities, including children, seniors, people with disabilities, and others.  The adopted text addresses these concerns.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A03_para01">01</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">There are two groups of target road users for traffic control devices:</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Traffic control devices can be targeted at operators of motor vehicles, including driving automation systems, and at vulnerable road users.</span></span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1A03_para02">02</span><span class="support">Targeted operators of motor vehicles include motorists, public transportation operators, truck drivers, and motorcyclists. Targeted users also include vulnerable road users, who have little to no protection from crash forces. These users are defined in Title 23, U.S.C. 148(a). They include bicyclists and pedestrians, including persons with disabilities. Pedestrians with disabilities might be blind or vision-impaired, have mobility limitations, or other impairments. Protection of vulnerable users is a priority in this Manual as directed in Section 11135 of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1A03_para03">03</span><span class="support">Operators of motor vehicles and vulnerable road users are both likely to be present on roadways where adjacent land use suggests that trips could be served by varied modes. Application of traffic control devices on these roadways requires careful consideration of measures to set and design for appropriate speeds; separation of various users in time and space; improvement of connectivity and access for pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit riders, including for people with disabilities; and implementation of safety countermeasures.</span></p>
	</div>
    <ol type="A" class="support text_added text_deleted change_from_npa">
      <li>Operators of vehicles, including bicyclists -- This target user is a reasonable and prudent individual who is alert and attentive, has demonstrated a basic proficiency in operating a vehicle on a specific facility, has demonstrated a basic understanding of traffic control devices and traffic laws, and is operating in a lawful manner that is appropriate for the facility and conditions, while demonstrating due care for the current conditions on the roadway.</li>

      <li>Pedestrians -- This target user is an alert and attentive individual who is functioning in a lawful manner that is appropriate for the facility and conditions, while demonstrating due care for the current conditions of the roadway. Pedestrians with disabilities might be blind or vision-impaired, have mobility limitations, or other impairments.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added"><span class="paranum" id="section1A03_para02">02</span><span class="support ">Because of the connectivity of the transportation network, familiarity of the target road users with a particular location cannot be presumed for the purpose of selecting and installing traffic control devices.</span></span></span></p>
	
	<h3 id="section1A04">Section 1A.04 Use of the MUTCD</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>6. FHWA proposes to add a new Section 1A.04, titled,
“Use  of  the  MUTCD,”  with  two  new  Standard paragraphs   and   one   new   Guidance   paragraph consisting of text recommended by items 528 and 529 of  the  20-Year  Vision  and  Strategic  Plan  for  the MUTCD,  plus  additional  text  relocated  from  the Introduction. (http://ncutcd.org/wp-content/uploads/ MUTCD/MUTCD-20-Year-Vision-NCUTCD-Appvd-1-
9-14-FINAL.pdf).The proposed text establishes minimum qualifications for those responsible for performing traffic control device activities in order to reduce the potential for unqualified individuals performing traffic control device activities, specifically recommending that traffic control device decisions should be made with consideration of multiple factors.
</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The new Section is adopted as proposed, except that P1 is changed from Standard to Support. Also, P2 is adopted with clarifying revisions and an added second sentence to show how engineering judgment or study is part of the decision, thereby introducing the terms.    This is not a new requirement, since all engineering decisions are derived from either engineering judgment or engineering study.</p>

	<p>Lastly, FHWA proposes to change Support paragraphs to provide clarity and to reflect the new use of unnumbered sub-chapter headings.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The changes are adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para01">01</span><span class="support">Traffic control device principles in the MUTCD <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">shall be</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">are</span> developed for and used by individuals who are duly authorized and qualified to conduct traffic control device activities.</span></p>

	<p><span class="text_added change_from_npa"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Where <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">MUTCD</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">the</span> content <span class="text_added change_from_npa">of this Manual </span>requires a decision for implementation, such decisions shall be made by <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">individuals who have</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">an engineer, or an individual under the supervision of an engineer, who has</span> the appropriate level<span class="text_added change_from_npa">s</span> of experience and expertise to make <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the </span>traffic control device decision<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span>.<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> Those decisions shall be made using engineering judgment or engineering study, as required by the MUTCD provision.</span></span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para03">03</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">See </span><a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">for</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">contains</span> definitions of "engineering study" and "engineering judgment."</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">In making traffic control device decisions, individuals should consider the impacts of the decision on the following: safety and operational efficiency (mobility) of <span class="text_added change_from_npa">all </span>road user<span class="text_added change_from_npa">s</span> at that location<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> the effective <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">utilization</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">use</span> of agency resources<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> cost-effectiveness<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> and enforcement and education aspects of traffic control devices.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para05">05</span><span class="support">Throughout this Manual the headings Standard, Guidance, Option, and Support<span class="text_added">, the meanings of which are defined in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C01">Section 1C.01</a>,</span> are used to classify the nature of the text that follows. Figures and tables, including the notes contained therein, supplement the text and might constitute a Standard, Guidance, Option, or Support. The user needs to refer to the appropriate text to classify the nature of the figure, table, or note contained therein.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Except when a specific numeral is required or recommended by the text of a Section of this Manual, numerals displayed on the images of devices in the figures that specify quantities such as times, distances, speed limits, and weights should be regarded as examples only. When installing any of these devices, the numerals should be appropriately altered to fit the specific situation.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">Similarly, destination names, route numbers, and State route shields that are displayed on the images of devices in the figures should be regarded as examples only. When installing any of these devices, the destination names, route numbers, and State route shields should be appropriately altered to fit the specific situation.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para08">08</span><span class="support">The <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">following </span>information <span class="text_added change_from_npa">contained in <a href="#section1A04_para09">Paragraphs 9</a> and <a href="#section1A04_para10">10</a> of this Section </span>will be useful when reference is being made to a specific portion of text in this Manual.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para09">09</span><span class="support">There are nine Parts in this Manual and each Part <span class="text_deleted">is comprised of</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">comprises</span></span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">includes</span> one or more Chapters. Each Chapter <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">is comprised of</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">includes</span> one or more Sections. Parts are <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">given</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">identified by</span> a <span class="text_added">single-digit </span>numerical identification, such as <span class="text_added change_from_npa">"</span>Part 2 – Signs.<span class="text_added change_from_npa">"</span> Chapters are identified by the Part number and a letter, such as <span class="text_added change_from_npa">"</span>Chapter 2B – Regulatory Signs<span class="text_deleted">, Barricades, and Gates</span>.<span class="text_added change_from_npa">"</span> Sections are identified by the Chapter number and letter followed by a decimal point and a <span class="text_added">2-digit </span>number, such as <span class="text_added">"</span>Section 2B.03 – Size of Regulatory Signs.<span class="text_added change_from_npa">"</span><span class="text_added"> In some Chapters<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> the Sections are grouped together by subject into un<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">-</span>numbered sub-chapters with a heading, such as "Signing for Right-of-Way at Intersections" (<span class="text_added change_from_npa">for </span>Sections 2B.06 through 2B.20).</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A04_para10">10</span><span class="support">Each Section <span class="text_deleted">is comprised of</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">comprises</span></span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">includes</span> one or more paragraphs. The paragraphs are indented and are identified by a number. Paragraphs are counted from the beginning of each Section without regard to the intervening text headings (Standard, Guidance, Option, or Support)<span class="text_added"> or any intervening text in embedded Figures or Tables</span>. Some paragraphs have lettered or numbered items. As an example of how to cite this Manual, the phrase “Not less than 40 feet beyond the stop line” that appears in Section 4D.<span class="text_deleted">14</span><span class="text_added">08</span> of this Manual would be referenced in writing as “Section 4D.<span class="text_deleted">14</span><span class="text_added">08</span>, P<span class="text_added">ar.</span>1, A.1,” and would be verbally referenced as “Item A.1 of Paragraph 1 of Section 4D.<span class="text_deleted">14</span><span class="text_added">08</span>.”</span></p>

    <h3 id="section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_deleted">11</span><span class="text_added">05</span> Relation to Other Publications</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>7. In Section 1A.05 (existing Section 1A.11) Relation to Other Publications, FHWA proposes to add three additional publications to the list of useful sources of information (“Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware” 2009 Edition, AASHTO, “Equipment and Materials Standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers” 1988 Edition ITE, and “Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads: Light Emitting Diode (LED) Vehicle  Arrow  Traffic  Signal  Supplement” 2007 Edition ITE).</p>
	<p>FHWA also proposes to delete four publications from the existing list of useful sources of information (“Roundabouts—An Informational Guide (FHWA– RD–00–067)” 2000 Edition FHWA, “Purchase Specification for Flashing and Steady Burn Warning Lights”  1981  Edition  ITE,  “Traffic  Detector Handbook” 1991 Edition ITE, and “Traffic Signal Lamps” 1980 Edition ITE).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The section is adopted, but in consideration of comments, the proposal to add, delete, and revise listed “other publications” in P2 is not adopted. Instead, FHWA deletes all of those existing listed publications.   Commenters noted that the list of referenced “other publications” is not an exhaustive list and it is not known whether all the publications listed contain information that is consistent with the MUTCD’s provisions.  Also, a new P3 is added to clarify that the MUTCD is not a roadway design manual.</p>

	<p>Lastly, FHWA proposes to update several of the listed publication editions. FHWA proposes these revisions to reflect the most current and applicable supporting publications and to delete any references to publications that are obsolete or have been superseded.</p>
	<p>In concert with this change, FHWA also proposes Standard and Support paragraphs to explain how specific editions of the resources listed apply to the new edition of the MUTCD.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The proposed added Standard and Support paragraphs at the end of the Section are not adopted.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A05_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">To the extent that they are incorporated by specific reference, the latest editions of the following publications, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">or those editions specifically noted, </span>shall be a part of this Manual: “Standard Highway Signs<span class="text_deleted"> and Markings</span>” <span class="text_deleted">book</span><span class="text_added">publication</span> (FHWA)<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> and “Color Specifications for Retroreflective Sign and Pavement Marking Materials” (appendix to <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">S</span>ubpart F of Part 655 of Title 23 of the Code of Federal Regulations).</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A05_para02">02</span> <span class="support">The “Standard Highway Signs<span class="text_deleted"> and Markings</span>” <span class="text_deleted">book</span><span class="text_added">publication</span> includes standard alphabets and symbols and arrows for signs and pavement markings.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted">

    <p><span class="support">For information about the publications mentioned in <a href="#section1A05_para01">Paragraph 1</a>, visit the Federal Highway Administration’s MUTCD website at <a href="http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov">http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov</a>, or write to the FHWA, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE, HOTO, Washington, DC 20590.</span></p>

    </span> 

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<span class="text_added"><p><span class="paranum" id="section1A05_para03">03</span> <span class="support">The MUTCD is not a roadway design manual, and engineers seeking guidance on design should refer to appropriate roadway design guides recognized by the Federal Highway Administration as needed for the design application.</span></p></span>
	</div>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1A05_para03">03</span> <span class="support">Other publications <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">that </span><span class="change_from_npa">are</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">are not regulatory in nature, and are not independently legally enforceable, but might be</span></span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> referenced in this Manual as</span> useful <span class="text_added change_from_npa">re</span>sources<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> of information </span><span class="text_deleted">with respect to the use of this Manual are listed in this paragraph. See <a href="../intro/addresses.html">Addresses</a> in this Manual for ordering information for the following publications (later editions might also be available as useful sources of information)</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">include</span>:</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, but they are not regulatory in nature and are not independently legally enforceable.</span></span></p>

    <ol class="support text_deleted change_from_npa">
      <li>“AAA School Safety Patrol Operations Manual,” 2006 Edition (American Automobile Association—AAA)</li>

      <li>“Accessible Pedestrian Signals—A Guide to Best Practices (NCHRP Web-Only Document 117A),” 2008 Edition (Transportation Research Board—TRB)</li>

      <li>“American National Standard for High-Visibility Public Safety Vests,” (ANSI/ISEA 207-<span class="text_deleted">2006</span><span class="text_added">2011</span>), <span class="text_deleted">2006</span><span class="text_added">2011</span> Edition (International Safety Equipment Association—ISEA)</li>

      <li>“American National Standard for High-Visibility Safety Apparel and Headwear,” (ANSI/ISEA 107-<span class="text_deleted">2004</span><span class="text_added">2010</span>), <span class="text_deleted">2004</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Edition (ISEA)</li>

      <li>“A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets,” <span class="text_deleted">2004</span><span class="text_added">2011</span> Edition (American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials—AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Changeable Message Sign Operation and Messaging Handbook (FHWA-OP-03-070),” 2004 Edition (Federal Highway Administration—FHWA)</li>

      <li>“Designing Sidewalks and Trails for Access—Part 2—Best Practices Design Guide (FHWA-EP-01-027),” 2001 Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <span class="text_added">

      <li>"Equipment and Materials Standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers," 1988 Edition (available at http://www.ite.org/standards/led/signals.asp); which includes "Chapter 1--Traffic Signal Lamps," 1980 Edition; "Chapter 2--Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads," 1985 Edition; "Chapter 3--Pedestrian Traffic Control Indications," 1985 Edition; and "Chapter 13--Purchase Specification for Flashing and Steady Burn Warning Lights," 2001 Edition (ITE)</li>

      </span>

      <li>“Federal-Aid Highway Program Guidance on High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) Lanes,” <span class="text_deleted">2001</span><span class="text_added">2012</span> (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities,” <span class="text_deleted">1999</span><span class="text_added">2012</span> Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Guide for the Planning, Design, and Operation of Pedestrian Facilities,” 2004 Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Guide to Metric Conversion,” 1993 Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Guidelines for Accessible Pedestrian Signals (NCHRP Web-Only Document 117B),” 2008 Edition (TRB)</li>

      <span class="text_added">

      <li>"Guidelines for Determining Traffic Signal Change and Clearance Intervals: A Recommended Practice of Institute of Transportation Engineers," 2020 (Institute of Transportation Engineers--ITE)</li>

      </span>

      <li>“Guidelines for the Selection of Supplemental Guide Signs for Traffic Generators Adjacent to Freeways,” <span class="text_deleted">4th</span><span class="text_added">5th</span> Edition/Guide Signs, Part II: Guidelines for Airport Guide Signing/Guide Signs, Part III: List of Control Cities for Use in Guide Signs on Interstate Highways,” Item Code: <span class="text_deleted">GSGLC-4</span><span class="text_added">GSLC</span>, <span class="text_deleted">2001</span><span class="text_added">2016</span> Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Highway Capacity Manual,” <span class="text_deleted">2000</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Edition (TRB)</li>

      <li>“<span class="text_deleted">Standard Specifications for</span><span class="text_added">LRFD</span> Movable Highway Bridge<span class="text_deleted">s</span><span class="text_added"> Design Specifications</span>,” <span class="text_deleted">1988</span><span class="text_added">2007</span> Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Maintaining Traffic Sign Retroreflectivity,” <span class="text_deleted">2007</span><span class="text_added">2013</span> Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <span class="text_added">

      <li>"Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware," 2009 Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      </span>

      <li>“Manual of Traffic Signal Design,” 1998 Edition (Institute of Transportation Engineers—ITE)</li>

      <li>“Manual of Transportation Engineering Studies,<span class="text_added"> 2nd Edition</span>” <span class="text_deleted">1994</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Edition (ITE)</li>

      <li class="known_error_added">“Methods for Maintaining Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity,” (FHWA-SA-22-028), 2022 Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“NEMA Standards Publication TS 4-<span class="text_deleted">2005</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Hardware Standards for Dynamic Message Signs (DMS) With NTCIP Requirements,” <span class="text_deleted">2005</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Edition (National Electrical Manufacturers Association—NEMA)</li>

      <li>“Occupational Safety and Health Administration Regulations (Standards – 29 CFR), General Safety and Health Provisions – 1926.20,” amended <span class="text_deleted">June 30, 1993</span><span class="text_added">December 12, 2008</span> (Occupational Safety and Health Administration—OSHA)</li>

      <li>“Pedestrian Traffic Control Signal Indications<span class="text_added">--</span><span class="text_deleted">,” Part 1—1985 Edition; Part 2 </span><span class="text_added">Light Emitting Diode </span>(LED<span class="text_added">)</span> Pedestrian Traffic Signal Modules<span class="text_added">,"</span><span class="text_deleted">)—2004</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Edition (ITE)</li>

      <li>“Practice for Roadway Lighting,” RP-8, 2001 (Illuminating Engineering Society—IES)</li>

      <li>“Preemption of Traffic Signals Near Railroad Crossings,” 2006 Edition (ITE)</li>

      <span class="text_deleted">

      <li>“Purchase Specification for Flashing and Steady Burn Warning Lights,” 1981 Edition (ITE)</li>

      </span>

      <li>“Railroad-Highway Grade Crossing Handbook—Revised Second Edition (FHWA-SA-07-010),” 2007 Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“Ramp Management and Control Handbook (FHWA-HOP-06-001),” 2006 Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“Recommended Procedures for the Safety Performance Evaluation of Highway Features,” (NCHRP Report 350), 1993 Edition (TRB)</li>

      <li>“Roadside Design Guide,” <span class="text_deleted">2006</span><span class="text_added">2011</span> Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <li>“Roundabouts-An Informational Guide<span class="text_added">. 2nd Edition</span><span class="text_deleted"> (FHWA-RD-00-067)</span><span class="text_added"> (NCHRP Report 672)</span>,” <span class="text_deleted">2000</span><span class="text_added">2010</span> Edition (<span class="text_deleted">FHWA</span><span class="text_added">TRB</span>)</li>

      <li>“Safety Guide for the Prevention of Radio Frequency Radiation Hazards in the Use of Commercial Electric Detonators (Blasting Caps),” Safety Library Publication No. 20, <span class="text_deleted">July 2001</span><span class="text_added">2011</span> Edition (Institute of Makers of Explosives)</li>

      <li>“Signalized Intersections: an Informational Guide (FHWA-<span class="text_deleted">HRT-04-091</span><span class="text_added">SA-13-027</span>),” <span class="text_deleted">2004</span><span class="text_added">2013</span> Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“Signal Timing Manual (FHWA-HOP-08-024),” 2008 Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“The Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG),” July 1998 Edition (The U.S. Access Board)</li>

      <li>“Traffic Control Devices Handbook,” <span class="text_deleted">2001</span><span class="text_added">2013</span> Edition (ITE)</li>

      <li>“Traffic Detector Handbook,<span class="text_added"> Third Edition (FHWA-HRT-06-018 &amp; 139),</span>” <span class="text_deleted">1991</span><span class="text_added">2006</span> Edition (<span class="text_deleted">ITE</span><span class="text_added">FHWA</span>)</li>

      <li>“Traffic Engineering Handbook,” 2009 Edition (ITE)</li>

      <li>“Traffic Engineering Metric Conversion Folders—Addendum to the Guide to Metric Conversion,” 1993 Edition (AASHTO)</li>

      <span class="text_deleted">

      <li>“Traffic Signal Lamps,” 1980 Edition (ITE)</li>

      </span>

      <li>“Travel Better, Travel Longer: A Pocket Guide to Improving Traffic Control and Mobility for Our Older Population (FHWA-OP-03-098),” 2003 Edition (FHWA)</li>

      <li>“<span class="text_deleted">2009</span><span class="text_added">2014</span> AREMA Communications &amp; Signals Manual,” (American Railway Engineering &amp; Maintenance-of-Way Association—AREMA)</li>

      <li>“Uniform Vehicle Code (UVC) and Model Traffic Ordinance,<span class="text_deleted">”</span> 2000 Edition<span class="text_added">” and subsequent updates to "Rules of the Road" through 2014</span> (National Committee on Uniform Traffic <span class="text_deleted">Laws and Ordinances</span><span class="text_added">Control Devices</span>—<span class="text_deleted">NCUTLO</span><span class="text_added">NCUTCD</span>)</li>

      <li>“Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads<span class="text_added">:</span><span class="text_deleted">,” Part 1—1985 Edition; Part 2</span><span class="text_added">Light Emitting Diode</span> (LED<span class="text_added">)</span> Circular Signal Supplement<span class="text_added">, ”</span><span class="text_deleted">)—</span>2005 Edition<span class="text_deleted">; Part 3 (LED Vehicular Arrow Traffic Signal Supplement)—2004 Edition</span> (ITE)</li>

      <span class="text_added">

      <li>"Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads: Light Emitting Diode (LED) Vehicle Arrow Traffic Signal Supplement," 2007 Edition (ITE)</li>

      </span>
    </ol>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="text_added"><span class="support">Contact information for the organizations that publish the references in the preceding list is contained in Appendix A3 of this Manual.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="support">The provisions of this Manual have been developed based on the content included in the specific editions of the resources listed in Paragraph 3 of this Section. Newer editions of those resources are typically reflected in subsequent editions of or revisions to this Manual, which might result in one or more changes in the provisions to which the resources apply.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/><span class="standard">To the extent that they are referenced in this Manual, the resources listed in this Section shall refer only to the specific edition cited. Subsequent editions of those resources shall not be applied to the provisions of this Manual until such time as it is officially revised.</span></span></p></span>
	</div>

    <h3 id="section1A06"><span class="text_added">Section 1A.06 Uniform Vehicle Code - Rules of the Road</span></h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>8. FHWA proposes to add a new Section 1A.06, titled,
“Uniform Vehicle Code—Rules of the Road,” with text relocated from the existing Introduction and from existing Section 1A.02, plus additional new Support text to explain the current status of the Uniform Vehicle Code. FHWA proposes these revisions to provide clear guidance on the application of the Uniform Vehicle Code.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The new Section is adopted as proposed.  Some commenters stated that the UVC is out of date and no organization exists to update it.  The NCUTCD has agreed to update and take overall responsibility for the Rules of the Road portion of the UVC, but it is premature to change the content of Section 1A.06 to reference the NCUTCD’s work until it is published and reviewed by FHWA.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1A06_para01">01</span><span class="support">The “Uniform Vehicle Code<span class="text_added">”</span> (UVC)<span class="text_deleted">”</span> is one of the publications referenced in the MUTCD. The UVC contains a model set of motor vehicle codes and traffic laws for use throughout the United States<span class="text_added">, the intent of which is to promote national uniformity in these laws. The Rules of the Road contained in the UVC are intended to be recommendations for States to adopt in their State statutes and are not independently legally enforceable</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1A06_para02">02</span> <span class="guidance">The actions required of road users to obey regulatory devices should be specified by State statute, or in cases not covered by State statute, <span class="text_deleted">by</span><span class="text_added">in</span> local ordinance<span class="text_added">s</span> or resolution<span class="text_added">s</span>. Such statutes, ordinances, and resolutions should be consistent with the “Uniform Vehicle Code<span class="text_added change_from_npa">.</span>”<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> (see <a href="#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_deleted">11</span><span class="text_added">05</span></a>).</span></span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>