<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<link href="https://fonts.cdnfonts.com/css/helvetica-neue-55" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 3A - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">

	<div class="npa">
	<p>316. FHWA proposes to reorganize Part 3 to improve the continuity and flow of information regarding the application of markings in the MUTCD by relocating various paragraphs and sections throughout the part, dividing long sections into several sections each having a clearly understandable title and function, and creating a new Chapter 3C Crosswalks to compile information across multiple chapters into one location. The proposed reorganization is reflected in the descriptions below.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The reorganization of Part 3 is adopted as noted in the dispositions below.</p>
	</div>

    <h1>Chapter 3A. General</h1>

    <span class="text_deleted">
	<h3>Section 3A.01 Functions and Limitations</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Markings on highways and on private roads open to public travel have important functions in providing guidance and information for the road user. Major marking types include pavement and curb markings, delineators, colored pavements, channelizing devices, and islands. In some cases, markings are used to supplement other traffic control devices such as signs, signals, and other markings. In other instances, markings are used alone to effectively convey regulations, guidance, or warnings in ways not obtainable by the use of other devices.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support">Markings have limitations. Visibility of the markings can be limited by snow, debris, and water on or adjacent to the markings. Marking durability is affected by material characteristics, traffic volumes, weather, and location. However, under most highway conditions, markings provide important information while allowing minimal diversion of attention from the roadway.</span></p>
	</span>

    <h3 id="section3A01">Section <span class="text_deleted">3A.02</span><span class="text_added">3A.01</span> Standardization of Application</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>317. In Section 3A.01 (existing Section 3A.02) Standardization of Application, FHWA proposes to relocate existing P2 to Part 1 to make this provision applicable to all traffic control devices. FHWA proposes this change because all traffic control devices, not just markings, should be in place prior to the opening of any new highway or private road open to public travel.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">Existing P2 is relocated to Part 1 as proposed.</p>
	</div>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Markings are used to supplement other traffic control devices such as signs, signals, and other markings. In other instances, markings are used alone to effectively convey regulations, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">warnings, or </span>guidance<span class="text_deleted">, or warnings</span> in ways not obtainable by the use of other devices.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para02">02</span><span class="support">Markings can take many forms including road surface markings, curb markings, delineators, colored pavements, and channelizing devices.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Each standard marking shall be used only to convey the meaning prescribed for that marking in this Manual<span class="text_deleted">. W</span><span class="text_added">, including w</span>hen used for applications not described in this Manual<span class="text_deleted">, markings shall conform in all respects to the principles and standards set forth in this Manual</span>.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">Before any new highway, private road open to public travel (see definition in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A13">Section 1A.13</a>), paved detour, or temporary route is opened to public travel, all necessary markings should be in place.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para04">04</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">M</span><span class="text_added">Except as provided in <a href="part3h.xhtml">Chapter 3H</a>, m</span>arkings that must be visible at night shall be retroreflective unless <span class="text_added">the markings are adequately visible under street or highway lighting</span><span class="text_deleted">ambient illumination assures that the markings are adequately visible</span>. All markings on Interstate highways shall be retroreflective.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para05">05</span><span class="standard">Markings that are no longer applicable for roadway conditions or restrictions and that might cause confusion for the road user shall be removed or obliterated to be unidentifiable as a marking as soon as <span class="text_deleted">practical</span><span class="text_added">practicable</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A01_para06">06</span><span class="option">Until they can be removed or obliterated, markings <span class="text_added">that are no longer applicable for roadway conditions or restrictions </span>may be temporarily masked with <span class="text_added">non-reflective, preformed </span>tape that is approximately the same color as the pavement<span class="text_added"> surface</span>.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section3A02">Section <span class="text_deleted">3A.04</span><span class="text_added">3A.02</span> Materials</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>318. In Section 3A.02 (existing Section 3A.04) Materials, FHWA proposes changing existing P2 from Support to Option because the use of clumps or droplets of material is permissible, and the statement is more appropriate as an Option.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">Changing the existing Support in P2 of Section 3A.02 to Option is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to relocate existing P5 to Section 3G.04 (existing Section 3F.04) because it describes delineator placement.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">Existing P5 is moved to Section 3G.04 as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Pavement and curb markings are commonly placed by using paints or thermoplastics; however, other suitable marking materials, including raised pavement markers and colored pavements, are also used. Delineators and channelizing devices are visibly placed in a vertical position similar to signs above the roadway.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A02_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">The materials used for markings should provide the specified color throughout their useful life.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Consideration should be given to selecting pavement marking materials that will minimize tripping or loss of traction for road users, including pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorcyclists.</span></p>

	<p><span class="text_added"><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3A02_para03">03</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted">Some m</span><span class="text_added">M</span>arking systems <span class="text_added">that </span>consist of clumps or droplets of material with visible open spaces of bare pavement between the material droplets<span class="text_deleted">. These marking systems</span><span class="text_added">, which</span> can function in a manner that is similar to the marking systems that completely cover the pavement surface<span class="text_deleted"> and are suitable for use</span><span class="text_added">, may be used</span> as pavement markings if they meet the other pavement marking requirements of the highway agency. </span></p>

    <h3 id="section3A03">Section <span class="text_deleted">3A.05</span><span class="text_added">3A.03</span> Colors</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>319. In Section 3A.03 (existing Section 3A.05) Colors, FHWA proposes to clarify that the use of black markings is an Option that can be used to enhance the contrast of markings on a light-colored pavement.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The use of black markings is clarified as an Option as proposed. FHWA recognizes the comments received regarding this option being relatively broad, and the request for additional research to determine effective patterns to enhance contrast and whether guidance is needed to establish when black markings to increase contrast should be used.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">FHWA received comments requesting green to be included in the first standard paragraph which lists the allowable colors for markings. Although green is an allowable color for colored pavement under the provisions of Chapter 3H, there is no other approved marking application for green and therefore green is not added to the standard paragraph. FHWA also received comments requesting the earth tone equivalent colors referenced in Section 3H.03 be included in the first standard paragraph. Again, these colors are only used as a colored pavement, specifically as an aesthetic surface treatment. It is not appropriate to add these colors to the standard in
3A.03.
</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to relocate information regarding purple markings to Chapter 3F (existing Chapter 3E) Markings for Toll Plazas and Chapter 3H (existing Chapter 3G) Colored Pavement and retain a reference to those locations.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">References to Chapter 3F and Chapter 3H with respect to purple markings is added as proposed, with minor edits for consistency and to distinguish between markings and colored pavements.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">Although not proposed in the NPA, item C is added to clearly state both right-hand and left-hand edge lines shall be white on a reversible roadway. This is not a new requirement, rather a clarification.</p>

	<p>In addition, FHWA proposes to change existing P7 from Option to Standard since markings that simulate official route signs, when used, shall have the same colors as those used for the signs. FHWA proposes this change to ensure uniformity in the application that aids in recognition of the message.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">Existing P7 is changed from Option to Standard as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Markings shall be yellow, white, red, blue, or purple. The colors for markings shall conform to the standard highway colors.<span class="text_deleted"> Black in conjunction with one of the colors mentioned in the first sentence of this paragraph shall be a usable color.</span></span></p>

	<p><span class="text_added"><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para02">02</span><span class="option">Black <span class="text_added">markings </span>may be used in combination with the colors mentioned in <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">the first sentence of </span></span><a href="#section3A03_para01">Paragraph 1</a> <span class="text_added change_from_npa">of this Section </span><span class="text_deleted">where</span><span class="text_added">to enhance contrast with </span> a light-colored pavement<span class="text_deleted"> does not provide sufficient contrast with the markings</span>.</span></p>
	
	<p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">When used, yellow markings for longitudinal lines shall delineate:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>The separation of traffic traveling in opposite directions,</li>

      <li>The left-hand edge of the roadways of divided highways and one-way streets or ramps, or</li>

      <li>The separation of two-way left-turn lanes and reversible lanes from other lanes.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para04">04</span><span class="standard">When used, white markings for longitudinal lines shall delineate:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>The separation of traffic flows in the same direction,<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> or</span></li>
      <li>The right-hand edge of the roadway<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, or</span></li>
		<li><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Both the right-hand edge and left-hand edge of a reversible roadway.</span></li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para05">05</span><span class="standard">When used, red raised pavement markers or delineators shall delineate:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Truck escape ramps, or</li>

      <li>One-way roadways, ramps, or travel lanes that shall not be entered or used in the direction from which the markers are visible.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para06">06</span><span class="standard">When used, blue markings shall supplement white markings for parking spaces for persons with disabilities.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para07">07</span><span class="standard">When used, purple markings shall <span class="text_added">be in accordance with the provisions of <a href="part3f.xhtml">Chapter<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span> 3F</a><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> and 3H</span></span><span class="text_deleted">supplement lane line or edge line markings for </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> to identify </span><span class="change_from_npa">toll plaza approach lanes </span><span class="text_deleted">that are </span><span class="change_from_npa">restricted to use only by vehicles with registered electronic toll collection accounts</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para07">07</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">Colors used for</span><span class="text_added">When pavement markings that simulate</span> official route <span class="text_deleted">shield </span>signs <span class="text_deleted">(see Section 2D.11) may be</span><span class="text_added">are</span> used <span class="text_added">(see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B22">Section 3B.22</a>), </span><span class="text_deleted">as colors of symbol markings to simulate route shields on the pavement (see Section 3B.20.)</span><span class="text_added">the colors shall be the same as those that are used for the <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">official </span>route signs (see <a href="part2d.xhtml#section2D11">Section 2D.11</a>).</span></span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">When used in combination with other colors, black is not considered a marking color, but only a contrast-enhancing system for the markings.</span></p></span>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A03_para08">08</span><span class="support">Provisions regarding colored pavements are contained in <a href="part3h.xhtml">Chapter 3H</a>.</span></p>
	</span>

    <h3 id="section3A04">Section <span class="text_deleted">3A.06</span><span class="text_added">3A.04</span> Functions, Widths, and Patterns of Longitudinal Pavement Markings</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>320. In Section 3A.04 (existing Section 3A.06) Functions, Widths, and Patterns of Longitudinal Pavement Markings, FHWA proposes to add Item E to the list of general functions of longitudinal lines to clarify the functions of dotted lane lines and dotted lines used as a lane line or edge line extensions.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">Item E under the general functions Standard in
Section 3A.04 is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>In the list of widths and patterns of longitudinal lines, FHWA proposes to indicate that 6-inch-wide lines are to be used for freeways, expressways, and ramps as well as for all other roadways with speed limits greater than 40 mph and that 4- to 6-inch-wide lines are to be used for all other roadways. FHWA proposes this change to improve visibility and consistency on “high speed” facilities and based on research showing improved machine vision detectability (https://s3.amazonaws.com/media.atssa.com/Communications/Booklet_2018PMForMV4vs6in_FinalReport.pdf and <a href="https://apps.trb.org/cmsfeed/TRBNetProjectDisplay.asp?ProjectID=4004">https://apps.trb.org/cmsfeed/TRBNetProjectDisplay.asp?ProjectID=4004</a>).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">See Preamble of Federal Register for discussion of this item.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to change the definition of a wide line to at least 8 inches in width if 4-inch or 5- inch normal lines are used, and at least 10 inches in width if 6-inch normal lines are used. This change is proposed to clarify the definition based on varying practices for “normal” width lines and to reduce the impact on agencies that use 6-inch lines as their
“normal” width.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">See Preamble of Federal Register for discussion of this item.</p>

	<p>Also, FHWA proposes to expand the definition for a double line to clarify that the pavement surface must be visible between the lines except when contrast markings are used based on FHWA’s Official Ruling No. 3(09)-41(I).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">Changing item C under the widths and patterns Standard in Section 3A.04 is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>In addition, FHWA proposes to add a new Guidance statement regarding the width of the discernible space separating the parallel lines of a double line so that they can be recognized as a double line rather than two, separate disassociated single lines.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">See Preamble of Federal Register for discussion of this item.</p>
	</div>

	<div class="fr">
	<h4>Normal Line Width (4-inch to 6-inch)</h4>	
	<p>Based on comments to the NPA, a review of the relevant research, and the potential beneficial impacts of the recent final rule  related to maintaining pavement marking retroreflectivity that will increase pavement marking visibility, changing the width of normal and wide longitudinal lines is not adopted in the final rule and the existing provisions on longitudinal pavement marking width from the 2009 Edition are retained.</p>

	<p>In Section 3A.04 Functions, Widths, and Patterns of Longitudinal Pavement Markings, in the Standard describing the widths and patterns of longitudinal lines, FHWA proposed in the NPA to revise the width of normal lines to indicate that 6-inch-wide lines are to be used for freeways, expressways, and ramps as well as for all other roadways with speed limits greater than 40 mph and that 4- to 6-inch-wide lines are to be used for all other roadways. The FHWA proposed this change to improve visibility and consistency on “high-speed” facilities and based on research showing improved machine vision detectability.</p>

	<p>The FHWA also proposed to change the definition of a wide line to at least 8 inches in width if 4-inch or 5-inch normal lines are used, and at least 10 inches in width if 6-inch normal lines are used. This change was proposed to clarify the definition based on varying practices for “normal” width lines and to reduce the impact on agencies that use 6-inch lines as their “normal” width.</p>

	<p>In addition, FHWA proposed to add a new Guidance statement regarding the width of the discernible space separating the parallel lines of a double line so that they can be recognized as a double line rather than two, separate disassociated single lines.</p>

	<p>The FHWA received several comments opposed to the new requirement for 6-inch-wide normal lines due to the additional cost. Commenters suggested that the financial impact was underrepresented since the change is not a one-time cost but also increased life-cycle costs related to ongoing maintenance with pavement resurfacing and marking “refreshing.” Some commenters also suggested that the extent of the proposed 6-inch requirement was not supported by research. A number of agencies stated they may decide not to install markings at all on roadways that do not meet the warrants for centerlines and edge lines in Sections 3B.02 and 3B.10 based on the increased cost of 6-inch markings, which may result in increased crashes. Several studies have shown that the presence of longitudinal pavement markings decreases crashes, including on roadways where the MUTCD provisions do not require or recommend the markings. Some commenters also stated additional research is needed for human road users, as well as driving automation systems, to determine the actual discernable limits for distinguishing between a normal and wide line and the discernable space between double lines.</p>

	<p>Additional Support statements are added to inform practitioners that based on research documented in FHWA's Wider Edge Lines Proven Safety Countermeasure, 6-inch edge lines can provide a safety benefit over the minimum 4-inch edge lines on all facility types (e.g., freeways, multilane divided and undivided highways, two-lane highways) in both urban and rural areas. A reference to Section 5B.02 is also included to inform practitioners of the longitudinal pavement marking considerations relevant to driving automation systems. These changes will provide agencies information and the flexibility to determine where to use wider longitudinal lines based on data specific to their roadways, consistent with FHWA's Proven Safety Countermeasures for Roadway Departure. Further, the proposed Guidance statement regarding the width of the discernible space separating the parallel lines of a double line is adopted with revision to specify the space should not exceed two times the line width of a single line.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para01">01</span><span class="standard">The general functions of longitudinal lines shall be<span class="text_added"> as follows</span>:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>A double line indicates maximum or special restrictions<span class="text_deleted">,</span><span class="text_added">.</span></li>

      <li>A solid line discourages or prohibits crossing (depending on the specific application)<span class="text_deleted">,</span><span class="text_added">.</span></li>

      <li>A broken line indicates a permissive condition<span class="text_deleted">, and</span><span class="text_added">.</span></li>

      <li>A dotted <span class="text_added">lane </span>line provides <span class="text_deleted">guidance or </span>warning of a downstream change in lane function.</li>

		<li><span class="text_added">A dotted line used as a lane line or edge line extension guides vehicles through an intersection, a taper area, or an interchange ramp area.</span></li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para02">02</span><span class="standard">The widths and patterns of longitudinal lines shall be as follows:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Normal <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">width </span></span>line—<span class="change_from_npa">4 to </span>6 inches wide<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added"> for freeways, expressways, and ramps; 6 inches for all other roadways with speed limits &gt; 40 mph, 4 to 6 inches for all other roadways.</span></span>.</li>

      <li>Wide line—at least <span class="change_from_npa">twice the width of a normal line</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">8 inches in width if 4 inch or 5 inch normal width lines are used and at least 10 inches in width if 6 inch normal width lines are used</span></span>.</li>

      <li>Double line—two parallel lines separated by a discernible space.<span class="text_added"> The pavement surface shall be visible between the lines in the same way that it is visible outside the lines, except where contrast markings are used in combination with the double line (see <a href="#section3A03">Section 3A.03</a>).</span></li>

      <li>Broken line—normal <span class="text_added">width </span>line segments separated by gaps.</li>

      <li>Dotted line—noticeably shorter line segments separated by shorter gaps than used for a broken line. The width of a dotted line extension shall be at least the same as the width of the line it extends.</li>
    </ol>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para03">03</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">T</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">To be recognized as a double line rather than two separate, disassociated single lines, t</span>he discernible space separating the parallel lines of a double line should not exceed <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">that which is necessary to be recognized as a double line rather than two separate, disassociated</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">two times the line width of a</span> single line<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span>.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para04">04</span><span class="support">The width of the line indicates the degree of emphasis.</span></p>
	
	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para05">05</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Wide edge lines have</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Increasing edge line width from 4 inches to 6 inches has</span> been shown to be <span class="text_added change_from_npa">a </span>beneficial <span class="text_added change_from_npa">countermeasure to </span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">when applied in combination with horizontal alignment warning signs to </span>enhance safety <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">around curves and</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">at</span> locations with a history of run<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">-</span>off<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">-</span>the<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">-</span>road crashes (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B09">Section 3B.09</a>).<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> Wider normal lines with a 6-inch width instead of the minimum 4-inch width can be beneficial to both human drivers and driving automation systems (see <a href="part5b.xhtml#section5B02">Section 5B.02</a>).</span></span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Broken lines should consist of 10-foot line segments and 30-foot gaps, or dimensions in a similar ratio of line segments to gaps as appropriate for traffic speeds and <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the </span>need for delineation<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">, except within the circulatory roadway of a circular intersection as provided in Section 3D.02</span></span>.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Patterns for dotted lines depend on the application (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B04">Sections 3B.04</a> and <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B08">3B.08</a>.)</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">A dotted line used as a lane line <span class="text_added">(see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B07">Section 3B.07</a>) </span>should consist of 3-foot line segments and 9-foot gaps. A dotted line for line extensions within an intersection<span class="text_deleted"> or</span><span class="text_added">,</span> taper area<span class="text_added">, or interchange ramp area</span> <span class="text_added">(see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B11">Section 3B.11</a>) </span>should consist of 2-foot line segments and 2-<span class="text_added change_from_npa">foot</span> to 6-foot gaps.</span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A04_para08">08</span><span class="support">Section 5B.02 contains information on pavement marking considerations for driving automation systems.</span></p>
	</span></div>

	
	<h3 id="section3A05">Section <span class="text_deleted">3A.03</span><span class="text_added">3A.05</span> Maintaining Minimum Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>Section 3A.05, Maintaining Minimum Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity, was reserved in the NPA for future content based on an ongoing FHWA rulemaking.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">See Preamble of Federal Register for discussion of this item.</p>
	</div>

	<div class="fr">
	<h4>Retroreflectivity</h4>
	<p>When FHWA released the NPA for the 11th Edition, a separate rulemaking remained in progress to revise the MUTCD to include a Standard for the minimum level of retroreflectivity that must be maintained for pavement markings. Therefore, FHWA designated Section 3A.05 Maintaining Minimum Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity as reserved for the future provisions from the separate FHWA rulemaking, without any proposed text. Several commenters endorsed the inclusion of language in this final rule based on current research to facilitate both human vision and automotive cameras. It was noted that driving automation systems use pavement markings for guidance, and minimum retroreflectivity levels would enhance system reliability. A comment was made to exclude minimum retroreflectivity requirements for roads closed to the public at night as the installation could otherwise be cost prohibitive where they are not currently installed, namely on park roadways.</p>

	<p>The FHWA published the final rule on pavement marking minimum retroreflectivity on August 5, 2022 (<a href="https://www.federalregister.gov/citation/87-FR-47921">87 FR 47921</a>), which became Revision 3 to the 2009 edition of the MUTCD. As a result, FHWA incorporates the provisions from that completed rulemaking which include Support, Options, Guidance, and Standards regarding minimum maintained retroreflectivity levels for longitudinal pavement markings on all roadways open to public travel with speed limits of 35 mph and greater. Option statements define markings that may be excluded from the provisions of maintaining minimum retroreflectivity based on conditions such as ambient light levels, daily volume, and type of marking (e.g., dotted extension lines, curb markings, parking space markings, and shared-use path markings). The compliance date established by the final rule on pavement marking minimum retroreflectivity remains in effect and is added to Table 1B-1 in this final rule.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Except as provided in <a href="#section3A05_para05">Paragraph 5</a><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> of this Section</span>, a method designed to maintain retroreflectivity at or above 50 mcd/m<span style="vertical-align: super;">2</span>/lx under dry conditions shall be used for longitudinal markings on roadways with speed limits of 35 mph or greater.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Except as provided in <a href="#section3A05_para05">Paragraph 5</a><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> of this Section</span>, a method designed to maintain retroreflectivity at or above 100 mcd/m<span style="vertical-align: super;">2</span>/lx under dry conditions should be used for longitudinal </span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The method used to maintain retroreflectivity shuld be one or more of those described in “Methods for Maintaining Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity” <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">(see Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span>)</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">(FHWA-SA-22-028), 2022 Edition, FHWA</span> or developed from an engineering study based on the values in <a href="#section3A05_para01">Paragraphs 1</a> and <a href="#section3A05_para02">2</a><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> of this Section</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para04">04</span><span class="support">Retroreflectivity levels for pavement markings are measured with an entrance angle of 88.76 degress and an observation angle of 1.05 degrees. This geometry is also referred to as 30-meter geometry. The unit of pavement marking retroreflectivity are reported in mcd/m<span style="vertical-align: super;">2</span>/lx, which means millicandelas per square meter per lux.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para05">05</span><span class="option">The following markings may be excluded from the provisions established in <a href="#section3A05_para01">Paragraphs 1</a> and <a href="#section3A05_para02">2</a><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> of this Section</span>:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="option">
      <li>Markings where ambient illumination assures that the markings are adequately visible;</li>

      <li>Markings on streets or highways that have an ADT of less than 6,000 vehicles per day;</li>

      <li>Dotted extension lines that extend a longitudinal line through an intersection, major driveway, or interchange area (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B11">Section 3B.<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">08</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">11</span></a>);</li>

      <li>Curb markings;</li>

      <li>Parking space markings; and</li>

      <li>Shared-use path markings.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para06">06</span><span class="support">The provisions of this section do not apply to non-longitudinal pavement markings including, but not limited to, the following:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Transverse markings;</li>

      <li>Word, symbol, and arrow markings;</li>

      <li>Crosswalk markings; and</li>

      <li>Chevron, diagonal, and crosshatch markings.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para07">07</span><span class="support">Special circumstances will periodically cause pavement marking retroreflectivity to be below the minimum levels. These circumstances include, but are not limited to, the following:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Isolated locations of abnormal degradation;</li>

      <li>Periods preceding imminent resurfacing or reconstruction;</li>

      <li>Unanticipated events such as equipment breakdowns, material shortages, and contracting problems; and</li>

      <li>Loss of retroreflectivity resulting from snow maintenance operations.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section3A05_para08">08</span><span class="support">When such circumstances occur, compliance with <a href="#section3A05_para01"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">p</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">P</span>aragraphs 1</a> and <a href="#section3A05_para02">2</a> is still considered to be achieved if a reasonable course of action is taken to resume maintenance of minimum retroreflectivity in a timely manner according to the maintaining agency's method(s), policies, and procedures.</span></p>
	
  </div>
</body>
</html>