<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 4A - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">

	<div class="npa">
	<p>382. FHWA proposes to reorganize Part 4 by dividing some existing long chapters and sections into several chapters and/or several sections, each having a clearly understandable title, and by moving certain material to new locations within Part 4 to consolidate similar information in one place. In some cases, this involves the proposed creation of new chapters and sections that do not exist in the 2009 MUTCD. FHWA believes this proposed reorganization would create a more logical flow of information and make it easier for users to find the content they need.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The reorganization of Part 4 is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>In addition, FHWA proposes to delete text from various sections where such material duplicates or is very similar to existing text in other sections within Part 4 or elsewhere in the MUTCD. These reorganizations and elimination of redundancies are editorial in nature and do not significantly change the technical content or meaning, except as otherwise discussed below.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The editorial revisions of Part 4 are adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <h1>Chapter 4A. General</h1>

    <h3 id="section4A01">Section 4A.01 Types</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A01_para01">01</span><span class="support">The following types and uses of highway traffic signals are discussed in <a href="part4_toc.html">Part 4</a>: traffic control signals; <span class="text_added">bicycle signal faces; </span>pedestrian signal<span class="text_deleted">s</span><span class="text_added"> heads</span>; hybrid beacons; <span class="text_added">rectangular rapid flashing beacons; </span>emergency-vehicle <span class="text_added">traffic control </span>signals; traffic control signals for one-lane, two-way facilities; traffic control signals for freeway entrance ramps; <span class="text_deleted">traffic control signals for </span>movable bridge<span class="text_deleted">s</span><span class="text_added"> traffic signals</span>; toll plaza traffic signals; flashing beacons; lane-use control signals; and in-roadway <span class="text_added">warning </span>lights.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted">

	<h3>Section 4A.02 Definitions Relating to Highway Traffic Signals</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="support">Definitions and acronyms pertaining to <a href="part4_toc.html">Part 4</a> are provided in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A13">Sections 1A.13</a> and <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A14">1A.14</a>.</span></p>
	</span>

	<h3 id="section4A02">Section <span class="text_deleted">4D.04</span><span class="text_added">4A.02</span> Meaning<span class="text_added change_from_npa">s</span> of <span class="text_deleted">Vehicular </span>Signal Indications</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A02_para01">01</span><span class="support">The “Uniform Vehicle Code” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A06">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">06</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>) is the primary source for the standards for the meaning of vehicular signal indications to both vehicle operators and pedestrians as provided in <span class="text_deleted">this </span>Section<span class="text_added">s <a href="#section4A03">4A.03</a> and <a href="#section4A04">4A.04</a></span>, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the standards for the meanings of separate bicycle signal face indications as provided in Section <a href="#section4A05">4A.05</a>, </span>and the standards for the meaning of separate pedestrian signal head indications as provided in <a href="#section4A06">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.02</span><span class="text_added">4A.06</span></a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4A02_para02">02</span><span class="support">The physical area that is defined as being “within the intersection” is dependent upon the conditions that are described in the definition of intersection in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1C02">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.02</span></a>.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section4A03"><span class="text_added">Section 4A.03 Meanings of Steady Vehicular Signal Indications</span></h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A03_para01">01</span><span class="standard">The following meanings shall be given to <span class="text_added">steady </span>highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Steady green signal indications shall have the following meanings: 

      <ol>
        <li>Vehicular traffic facing a CIRCULAR GREEN signal indication is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a U-turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal indications, or other traffic control devices. 

        <p>Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a U-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to:</p>

        <ol type="a">
          <li>Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk, and</li>

          <li>Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.</li>
        </ol>

<br/> 

        <p>In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.</p></li>

        <li>Vehicular traffic facing a GREEN ARROW signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. 

        <p>Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a U-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to:</p>

        <ol type="a">
          <li>Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk, and</li>

          <li>Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.</li>
        </ol></li>

        <li>Pedestrians facing a CIRCULAR GREEN signal indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.</li>

        <li>Pedestrians facing a GREEN ARROW signal indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, shall not cross the roadway.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Steady yellow signal indications shall have the following meanings: 

      <ol>
        <li>Vehicular traffic facing a steady CIRCULAR YELLOW signal indication is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will be displayed immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection. The rules set forth concerning vehicular operation under the movement(s) being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady CIRCULAR YELLOW signal indication is displayed.</li>

        <li>Vehicular traffic facing a steady YELLOW ARROW signal indication is thereby warned that the related GREEN ARROW movement or the related flashing arrow movement is being terminated. The rules set forth concerning vehicular operation under the movement(s) being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady YELLOW ARROW signal indication is displayed.</li>

        <li>Pedestrians facing a steady CIRCULAR YELLOW or YELLOW ARROW signal indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device shall not start to cross the roadway.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Steady red signal indications shall have the following meanings: 

      <ol>
        <li>Vehicular traffic facing a steady CIRCULAR RED signal indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication to proceed is displayed, or as provided below.<br/> 

        <p>Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a turn on red or a steady RED ARROW signal indication is displayed, vehicular traffic facing a steady CIRCULAR RED signal indication is permitted to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street, after stopping. The right to proceed with the turn shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a STOP sign.</p></li>

        <li>Vehicular traffic facing a steady RED ARROW signal indication shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such RED ARROW is displayed. 

        <p>When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a steady RED ARROW signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady RED ARROW signal indication is permitted to enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow signal indication, after stopping. The right to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the arrow and shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a STOP sign.</p></li>

        <li>Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing a steady CIRCULAR RED or steady RED ARROW signal indication shall not enter the roadway.</li>
      </ol></li>
</ol>

	<h3 id="section4A04"><span class="text_added">Section 4A.04 Meanings of Flashing Vehiclar Signal Indications</span></h3>

    <span class="text_added"><p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A04_para01">01</span><span class="standard">The following meanings shall be given to flashing highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians:</span></p></span>

<ol type="A" class="standard">

      <li>A flashing green signal indication has no meaning and shall not be used.</li>

      <li>Flashing yellow signal indications shall have the following meanings: 

      <ol>
        <li>Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing CIRCULAR YELLOW signal indication is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a U-turn except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal indications, or other traffic control devices. 

        <p>Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a U-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to:</p>

        <ol type="a">
          <li>Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk, and</li>

          <li>Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.</li>
        </ol>

        <p>In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.</p></li>

        <li>Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing YELLOW ARROW signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. 

        <p>Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a U-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to:</p>

        <ol type="a">
          <li>Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk, and</li>

          <li>Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.</li>
        </ol>

        <p>In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.</p></li>

        <li>Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.</li>

        <li>When a flashing CIRCULAR YELLOW signal indication(s) is displayed as a beacon (see <a href="part4s.xhtml">Chapter <span class="text_deleted">4L</span><span class="text_added">4S</span></a>) to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified that there is a need to pay extra attention to the message contained thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Flashing red signal indications shall have the following meanings: 

      <ol>
        <li>Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing CIRCULAR RED signal indication shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a STOP sign.</li>

        <li>Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing RED ARROW signal indication if intending to turn in the direction indicated by the arrow shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the arrow and shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a STOP sign.</li>

        <li>Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the flashing red signal indication is first displayed.</li>

        <li>When a flashing CIRCULAR RED signal indication(s) is displayed as a beacon (see <a href="part4s.xhtml">Chapter 4L</a>) to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified that there is a need to pay extra attention to the message contained thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable. Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing STOP (R1-1), DO NOT ENTER (R5-1), or WRONG WAY (R5-1a) signs, and to applications where compliance with the supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.</li>
      </ol></li>
    </ol>

	<h3 id="section4A05"><span class="text_added">Section 4A.05 Meanings of Bicycle Symbol Signal Indications</span></h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>384. FHWA proposes to add a new section numbered and titled, “Section 4A.05 Meanings of Bicycle Symbol Signal Indications.” This section defines the meaning of the proposed bicycle traffic signal indications for bicyclists, described in proposed Chapter 4H, based on Interim Approval 16 (http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/ resources/interim_approval/ia16/index.htm).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A05_para01">01</span><span class="standard">The following meanings shall be given to bicycle signal indications for bicyclists:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="standard">

      <li>Bicyclists facing a steady GREEN BICYCLE signal indication are permitted to <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">cautiously </span>enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the lane-use arrow(s) displayed on the Bicycle Signal sign (see Section <a href="part9b.xhtml#section9B22">9B.22</a>) that is located immediately adjacent to the signal face<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> Bicyclists proceeding into the intersection during the display of the steady GREEN BICYCLE signal indication shall yield the right-of-way to:</li>

	<ol type="a">
          <li class="change_from_npa">Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk, and</li>
          <li class="change_from_npa">Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.</li>
        </ol>

	<li>Bicyclists facing a steady YELLOW BICYCLE signal indication are thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated and that a steady RED BICYCLE signal indication will be displayed immediately thereafter when bicyclists shall not enter the intersection. The rules set forth concerning bicycle operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady YELLOW BICYCLE indication is displayed.</li>

	<li>Bicyclists facing a steady RED BICYCLE signal indication shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the lane-use arrow(s) displayed on the Bicycle Signal sign <span class="change_from_npa">(see Section <a href="part9b.xhtml#section9B22">9B.22</a>)</span> that is located immediately adjacent to the signal face and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by another bicycle symbol signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a GREEN BICYCLE signal indication permitting the movement indicated by such RED BICYCLE signal indication is displayed.
	<p>Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a turn on red, bicyclists facing a steady RED BICYCLE signal indication are permitted to enter the intersection to turn right if there are no approach lanes for motor vehicle traffic to their right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street if there are no approach lanes for motor vehicle traffic to their left, after stopping. The right to proceed with the turn shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a STOP sign.</p>
	</li>
	<li>A flashing GREEN BICYCLE signal indication has no meaning and shall not be used.</li>
	<li><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Bicyclists facing a flashing YELLOW BICYCLE signal indication are permitted to cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the lane-use arrow(s) displayed on the Bicycle Signal sign (see Section 9B.22) that is located immediately adjacent to the signal face. Bicyclists proceeding into the intersection during the display of the flashing YELLOW BICYCLE signal indication shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk, and to other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.</span><span class="change_from_npa">A flashing YELLOW BICYCLE signal indication has no meaning and shall not be used.</span></li>
	<li>Bicyclists facing a flashing RED BICYCLE signal indication shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of hte intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the bicyclist has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed in the direction indicated by the lane-use arrow(s) displayed on the Bicycle Signal sign <span class="change_from_npa">(see Section <a href="part9b.xhtml#section9B22">9B.22</a>)</span> that is located immediately <span class="change_from_npa">adjacent</span> to the signal face shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a STOP sign.</li>
    </ol>

	</span>

	
    <h3 id="section4A06">Section <span class="text_deleted">4E.02</span><span class="text_added">4A.06</span> Meaning<span class="text_added">s</span> of Pedestrian Signal <span class="text_deleted">Head </span>Indications</h3>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A06_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Pedestrian signal <span class="text_deleted">head </span>indications shall have the following meanings:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
		<li>A flashing WALKING PERSON (symbolizing WALK) signal indication has no meaning and shall not be used.</li>
	
      <li><span class="text_added">Pedestrians facing a</span><span class="text_deleted">A</span> steady WALKING PERSON (symbolizing WALK) signal indication <span class="text_deleted">means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is </span><span class="text_added">shall be </span>permitted to start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in conflict with turning vehicles. <span class="text_deleted">The p</span><span class="text_added">P</span>edestrian<span class="text_added">s</span> shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the WALKING PERSON (symbolizing WALK) signal indication is first shown.</li>

      <li><span class="text_added">Pedestrians facing a</span><span class="text_deleted">A</span> flashing UPRAISED HAND (symbolizing DONT WALK) signal indication <span class="text_deleted">means that a pedestrian </span>shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication<span class="text_added">.</span><span class="text_deleted">, but that a</span><span class="text_added"> A</span>ny pedestrian who has already started to cross <span class="text_added">the roadway </span>on a steady WALKING PERSON (symbolizing WALK) signal indication shall <span class="text_added">continue to </span>proceed to the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided highway or only to <span class="change_from_npa">some other</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">a safety</span></span> island<span class="change_from_npa"> or pedestrian refuge area</span>.</li>

      <li><span class="text_added">Pedestrians facing a</span><span class="text_deleted">A</span> steady UPRAISED HAND (symbolizing DONT WALK) signal indication <span class="text_deleted">means that a </span>pedestrian shall not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.</li>
    </ol>

	<h3 id="section4A07">Section <span class="text_deleted">4D.33</span><span class="text_added">4A.07</span> Lateral Offset of Signal Supports and Cabinets</h3>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A07_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">The following items should be considered when placing signal supports and cabinets:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>Reference should be made to the <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) </span>“Roadside Design Guide<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span>” <span class="text_added change_from_npa">4th Edition, 2011, AASHTO, </span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">(see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>)</span> and to the <span class="text_added">U.S. Department of Justice 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, September 15, 2010 <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">and Code of Federal Regulations, Title 28, Parts 35 and 36</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">28 CFR 35 and 36</span>, Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990</span><span class="text_deleted">“Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG)”</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>)</span>.</li>

      <li>Signal supports should be placed as far as practical from the edge of the traveled way without adversely affecting the visibility of the signal indications.</li>

      <li>Where supports cannot be located based on the recommended AASHTO clearances, consideration should be given to the use of appropriate safety devices.</li>

      <li>No part of a concrete base for a signal support should extend more than 4 inches above the ground level at any point. This limitation does not apply to the concrete base for a rigid support.</li>

      <li>In order to minimize hindrance to the passage of persons with physical disabilities, a signal support or controller cabinet should not obstruct the sidewalk, or access from the sidewalk to the crosswalk.</li>

      <li>Controller cabinets should be located as far as <span class="text_deleted">practical</span><span class="text_added">practicable</span> from the edge of the roadway.</li>

      <li>On medians, the minimum clearances provided in Items A through E for signal supports should be obtained if practical.</li>
    </ol>

    <h3 id="section4A08">Section <span class="text_deleted">4D.34</span><span class="text_added">4A.08</span> Use of Signs at Signalized Locations</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>385. In Section 4A.08 (existing Section 4D.34) Use of Signs at Signalized Locations, FHWA proposes to change P5 from Standard to Guidance to provide agencies flexibility, based on engineering judgement, to achieve an appropriate balance in visibility for both traffic signal signs and traffic signal faces. The proposed text maintains priority for the visibility of the traffic signal faces.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A08_para01">01</span><span class="support">Traffic signal signs are sometimes used at highway traffic signal locations to instruct or guide pedestrians, bicyclists, or motorists. Among the signs typically used at or on the approaches to signalized locations are movement prohibition signs (see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B26">Section 2B.<span class="text_added">26</span><span class="text_deleted">18</span></a>), lane control signs (see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B27">Sections 2B.<span class="text_added">27</span><span class="text_deleted">19</span></a> to <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B29">2B.<span class="text_added">29</span><span class="text_deleted">22</span></a>), pedestrian crossing signs (see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B57">Section 2B.<span class="text_added change_from_npa">57</span><span class="text_deleted">51</span></a>), pedestrian <span class="text_added change_from_npa">and bicycle </span>actuation signs (see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B58">Section 2B.<span class="text_added change_from_npa">58</span><span class="text_deleted">52</span></a>), traffic signal signs (see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B59">Sections 2B.<span class="text_added change_from_npa">59</span><span class="text_deleted">53</span></a> and <a href="part2c.xhtml#section2C44">2C.<span class="text_added">44</span><span class="text_deleted">48</span></a>), <span class="text_added change_from_npa">No Turn on Red signs (see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B60">Section 2B.60</a>), </span>Signal Ahead warning signs (see <a href="part2c.xhtml#section2C35">Section 2C.<span class="change_from_npa">35</span></a>), Street Name signs (see <a href="part2d.xhtml#section2D45">Section 2D.<span class="text_added">45</span><span class="text_deleted">43</span></a>), and Advance Street Name signs (see <a href="part2d.xhtml#section2D46">Section 2D.<span class="text_added">46</span><span class="text_deleted">44</span></a>).</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A08_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Regulatory, warning, and guide signs should be used at <span class="text_added">highway </span>traffic <span class="text_deleted">control </span>signal locations as provided in Part 2 and as specifically provided elsewhere in Part 4.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance">Traffic signal signs should be located adjacent to the signal face to which they apply.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A08_para03">03</span><span class="support">Section 2B.<span class="text_added">27</span><span class="text_deleted">19</span> contains information regarding the use of overhead lane control signs on signalized approaches where lane drops, multiple-lane turns involving <span class="text_deleted">shared</span><span class="text_added">combined</span> through-and-turn lanes, or other lane-use regulations that would be unexpected by unfamiliar road users are present. </span></p>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A08_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">If used, illuminated traffic signal signs <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be designed and mounted in such a manner as to avoid glare and reflections that seriously detract from the signal indications. <span class="text_added">Highway t</span><span class="text_deleted">T</span>raffic <span class="text_deleted">control </span>signal faces <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be given dominant position and brightness to maximize their priority in the overall display.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section4A08_para05">05</span><span class="standard">The minimum vertical clearance and horizontal offset of the total assembly of traffic signal signs (see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B60">Section 2B.<span class="text_added">60</span><span class="text_deleted">53</span></a>) shall comply with the provisions of <a href="#section4D09">Sections 4D.<span class="text_added change_from_npa">09</span><span class="text_deleted">15</span></a> and <a href="#section4D10">4D.<span class="text_added change_from_npa">10</span><span class="text_deleted">16</span></a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4A08_para06">06</span><span class="standard">STOP signs shall not be used in conjunction with any <span class="text_added">highway </span>traffic <span class="text_deleted">control </span>signal operation, except in either of the following cases:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>If the signal indication for an approach is a flashing red at all times, or</li>

      <li>If a minor street or driveway is located within or adjacent to <span class="text_deleted">the</span><span class="text_added">an</span> area controlled by <span class="text_deleted">the</span><span class="text_added">a</span> traffic control signal, but does not require separate traffic signal control because an extremely low potential for conflict exists.</li>
    </ol>

    <h3 id="section4A09">Section <span class="text_deleted">4D.35</span><span class="text_added">4A.09</span> Use of Pavement Markings at Signalized Locations</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A09_para01">01</span><span class="support">Pavement markings <span class="text_deleted">(see <a href="part3_toc.html">Part 3</a>) </span>that clearly communicate the operational plan of an intersection to road users play an important role in the effective operation of <span class="text_added">highway </span>traffic <span class="text_deleted">control </span>signals. By designating the number of lanes, the use of each lane, the length of additional lanes on the approach to an intersection, and the proper stopping points, the engineer can design the signal phasing and timing to best match the goals of the operational plan.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A09_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Pavement markings should be used at <span class="text_added">highway </span>traffic <span class="text_deleted">control </span>signal locations as provided in <a href="part3_toc.html">Part 3</a>. If the road surface will not retain pavement markings, signs should be installed to provide the needed road user information.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section4A10">Section <span class="text_deleted">4D.02</span><span class="text_added">4A.10</span> Responsibility for Operation and Maintenance</h3>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4A10_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Prior to installing any <span class="text_added">highway </span>traffic <span class="text_deleted">control </span>signal, the responsibility for the maintenance of the signal and all of the appurtenances, hardware, software, and the timing plan(s) should be clearly established<span class="text_deleted">. T</span><span class="text_added"> by t</span>he responsible agency <span class="text_deleted">should provide for the maintenance of the traffic control signal and all of its appurtenances in a competent manner</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4A10_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">To this end the agency should:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>Keep every controller assembly in effective operation in accordance with its predetermined timing schedule; check the operation of the controller assembly frequently enough to verify that it is operating in accordance with the predetermined timing schedule; and establish a policy to maintain a record of all timing changes and that only authorized persons are permitted to make timing changes;</li>

      <li>Clean the optical system of the signal sections and replace the light sources as frequently as experience proves necessary;</li>

      <li>Clean and service equipment and other appurtenances as frequently as experience proves necessary;</li>

      <li>Provide for alternate operation of the traffic control signal during a period of failure, using flashing mode or manual control, or manual traffic direction by proper authorities as might be required by traffic volumes or congestion, or by erecting other traffic control devices;</li>

      <li>Have properly skilled maintenance personnel available without undue delay for all signal malfunctions and signal indication failures;</li>

      <li>Provide spare equipment to minimize the interruption of <span class="text_added">highway </span>traffic <span class="text_deleted">control </span>signal operation as a result of equipment failure;</li>

      <li>Provide for the availability of properly skilled maintenance personnel for the repair of all components; and</li>

      <li>Maintain the appearance of the signal displays and equipment.</li>
    </ol>
  </div>
</body>
</html>