<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 3F - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter <span class="text_deleted">3E</span><span class="text_added">3F</span>. Markings For Toll Plazas</h1>

    <h3 id="section3F01">Section <span class="text_deleted">3E.01</span><span class="text_added">3F.01</span> <span class="text_deleted">Markings for Toll Plazas</span><span class="text_added">General</span></h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3F01_para01">01</span><span class="support">At toll plazas, pavement markings help road users identify the proper lane(s) to use for the type of toll payment they plan to use, to channelize movements into the various lanes, and to delineate obstructions in the roadway.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section3F01_para02">02</span><span class="support"><a href="part3h.xhtml#section3H08">Section 3H.08</a> contains information on the use and application of purple colored pavement at toll plazas for vehicles with registered electronic toll collection (ETC) accounts.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section3F02">Section 3F.02 Longitudinal Markings</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>363. FHWA proposes to add a new section numbered and titled, “Section 3F.02 Longitudinal Markings” consisting of P5–P8 from existing Section 3E.01. In this section, FHWA proposes to add two new Guidance paragraphs recommending solid white lane line markings to separate toll lanes, payment methods, or to channelize movements at toll plazas and that the solid lines should begin at the upstream end of the full-width toll lane and continue to the toll plaza.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">New Section 3F.02 Longitudinal Markings with new Guidance is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>In existing P6 from existing Section 3E.01, FHWA proposes to change part of the Standard paragraph for maximum widths of purple solid longitudinal markings to Guidance to provide additional practitioner flexibility.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">Changing a portion of existing P6 from Section 3E.01 from Standard to Guidance is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3F02_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Solid white lane line markings should be used to separate toll lanes, payment methods, or to channelize movements at toll plazas.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section3F02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Solid white lane line markings should begin at the upstream end of the full-width toll lane and be continued to the toll plaza.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3F02_para03">03</span><span class="option">For a toll plaza approach lane that is restricted to use only by vehicles with registered ETC accounts, the solid white lane line or edge line on the right-hand side of the ETC Account-Only lane and the solid white lane line or solid yellow edge line on the left-hand side of the ETC Account-Only lane may be supplemented with purple solid longitudinal markings placed contiguous to the inside edges of the lines defining the lane.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3F02_para04">04</span><span class="standard">If <span class="text_deleted">used, </span>the purple solid longitudinal marking<span class="text_added">s</span> described in <span class="text_deleted">the previous p</span><a href="#section3F02_para03"><span class="text_added">P</span>aragraph <span class="text_added">3</span></a><span class="text_added"> <span class="text_added change_from_npa">of this Section</span>are used, the purple markings </span>shall be <span class="text_deleted">a minimum of</span><span class="text_added">at least</span> 3 inches <span class="text_deleted">in width and a maximum width equal to the width of the line it supplements, and ETC Account-Only preferential lane word markings (see <a href="part3e.xhtml#section3D01">Section 3D.01</a>) shall be installed within the lane</span><span class="text_added">wide</span>.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3F02_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">If the purple solid longitudinal markings described in <a href="#section3F02_para03">Paragraph 3</a> <span class="text_added change_from_npa">of this Section </span>are used, the purple markings should not be wider than the line they supplement.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section3F02_para06">06</span><span class="standard">Toll booths and the islands on which they are located are considered to be obstructions in the roadway and they shall be provided with markings that comply with the provisions of <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B13">Section 3B.<span class="text_deleted">10</span><span class="text_added">13</span></a> and <a href="part3j.xhtml">Chapter <span class="text_deleted">3G</span><span class="text_added">3J</span></a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3F02_para07">07</span><span class="option">Longitudinal pavement markings may be omitted alongside toll booth islands between the approach markings and any departure markings.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<h3 id="section3F03">Section 3F.03 Pavement Word and Symbol Markings</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3F03_para01">01</span><span class="support"><a href="part3e.xhtml#section3E03">Section 3E.03</a> contains information on the use of pavement word and symbol markings for ETC Account-Only lanes not specific to toll plazas.</span></p>
	</span>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3F03_para02">02</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">W</span><span class="text_added">Except as provided in <a href="#section3F03_para04">Paragraph 4</a><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> of this Section</span>, w</span>hen a lane on the approach to a toll plaza is restricted to use only by vehicles with registered ETC accounts, the ETC Account-Only lane word markings <span class="text_added">or pictograph </span>described in <a href="part3e.xhtml#section3E03">Section <span class="text_deleted">3D.01</span><span class="text_added">3E.03</span></a> <span class="text_deleted">and the preferential lane longitudinal markings described in Section 3D.02 </span>shall be used<span class="text_added"> (see <span class="text_added change_from_npa">Drawing A in </span><a href="part3h.xhtml#figure3H06">Figure 3H-6</a>)</span>.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section3F03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">When one or more <span class="text_added change_from_npa"></span><span class="text_added">open road tolling (</span>ORT<span class="text_added">)</span> lanes that are restricted to use only by vehicles with registered ETC accounts bypass a mainline toll plaza on a separate alignment, <span class="text_deleted">these</span><span class="text_added">pavement</span> word markings <span class="text_deleted">and longitudinal markings</span><span class="text_added">or pictographs</span> shall be used on the approach to the point where the ORT lanes diverge from the lanes destined for the mainline toll plaza<span class="text_added"> (see <span class="text_added change_from_npa">Drawings B and C in </span><a href="part3h.xhtml#figure3H06">Figure 3H-6</a>)</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3F03_para04">04</span><span class="option">Preferential lane-use <span class="text_deleted">symbol or word </span>markings may be omitted at toll plazas where physical conditions preclude the use of the markings.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section3F03_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">If an ORT lane that is immediately adjacent to a mainline toll plaza is not separated from adjacent cash payment toll plaza lanes by a curb or barrier, then channelizing devices (see <a href="part3i.xhtml#section3I01">Section <span class="text_deleted">3H</span><span class="text_added">3I</span>.01</a>), and/or longitudinal pavement markings that discourage or prohibit lane changing should be used to separate the ORT lane from the adjacent cash payment lane. This separation should begin on the approach to the mainline toll plaza at approximately the point where the vehicle speeds in the adjacent cash lanes drop below 30 mph during off-peak periods and should extend downstream beyond the toll plaza approximately to the point where the vehicles departing the toll plaza in the adjacent cash lanes have accelerated to 30 mph.</span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>