<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 4G - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1><span class="text_added">Chapter 4G. Flashing Operation of Traffic Control Signals</span></h1>

    <h3 id="section4G01">Section <span class="text_deleted">4D.28</span><span class="text_added">4G.01</span> Flashing Operation of Traffic Control Signals – General</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4G01_para01">01</span><span class="standard">The light source of a flashing signal indication shall be flashed continuously at a rate of not less than 50 or more than 60 times per minute.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4G01_para02">02</span><span class="standard">The displayed period of each flash shall be a minimum of 1/2 and a maximum of 2/3 of the total flash cycle.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4G01_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Flashing signal indications shall comply with the requirements of other Sections of this Manual regarding visibility-limiting or positioning of conflicting signal indications, except that flashing yellow signal indications for through traffic shall not be required to be visibility<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">-</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> </span>limited or positioned to minimize visual conflict for road users in separately controlled turn lanes.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4G01_para04">04</span><span class="standard">Each traffic control signal shall be provided with an independent flasher mechanism that operates in compliance with this <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Section</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Chapter</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4G01_para05">05</span><span class="standard">A manual switch <span class="text_added change_from_npa">shall be provided to initiate the flashing mode. </span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">, a conflict monitor (malfunction management unit) circuit, and, if appropriate, automatic means</span> <span class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">A</span> conflict monitor (malfunction management unit) circuit, and, if appropriate, automatic means </span>shall <span class="text_added change_from_npa">also </span>be provided to initiate the flashing mode.<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added"> If appropriate, a conflict monitor (malfunction management unit) circuit and/or an automatic means shall also be provided to initiate the flashing mode.</span></span></span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4G01_para06">06</span><span class="standard">The flashing operation shall not be terminated by removal or turn off of the controller unit or of the conflict monitor (malfunction management unit) or both.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4G01_para07">07</span><span class="option">Based on engineering study or engineering judgment, traffic control signals may be operated in the flashing mode on a scheduled basis during one or more periods of the day rather than operated continuously in the steady (stop-and-go) mode. </span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4G01_para08">08</span><span class="support"><a href="part4i.xhtml#section4I06">Sections <span class="text_deleted">4E.06</span><span class="text_added">4I.06</span></a> and <a href="part4k.xhtml#section4K04"><span class="text_deleted">4E.09</span><span class="text_added">4K.04</span></a> contain information regarding the operation of pedestrian signal heads and accessible pedestrian signal detector <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">pushbutton</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">push button</span> locator tones, respectively, during flashing operation.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4G02">Section <span class="text_deleted">4D.29</span><span class="text_added">4G.02</span> Flashing Operation – Transition Into Flashing Mode</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>415. In Section 4G.02 (existing 4D.29) Flashing Operation—Transition into Flash Mode, FHWA proposes to change P1 from Standard to Option because the language does not provide a requirement and is more appropriate as an Option.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span><span class="text_added"><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4G01_para01">01</span><span class="option">The transition from steady (stop-and-go) mode to flashing mode, if initiated by a conflict monitor (malfunction management unit) or by a manual switch, <span class="text_deleted">shall be permitted to</span><span class="text_added">may</span> be made at any time.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section4G02_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Programmed changes from steady (stop-and-go) mode to flashing mode shall be made under either of the following circumstances:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>At the end of the common major-street red interval (such as just prior to the start of the green in both directions on the major street), or</li>

      <li>Directly from a CIRCULAR GREEN signal indication to a flashing CIRCULAR YELLOW signal indication, or from a GREEN ARROW signal indication to a flashing YELLOW ARROW signal indication, or from a flashing YELLOW ARROW signal indication (see <span class="text_deleted">Sections 4D.17 to 4D.24</span><span class="text_added">Section <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F02">4F.02</a>, <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F04">4F.04</a>, <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F08">4F.08</a>, <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F09">4F.09</a>, <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F11">4F.11</a>, and <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F15">4F.15</a></span>) to a flashing YELLOW ARROW signal indication <span class="text_added">(</span>in a different signal section<span class="text_added"> if the signal face displays the steady YELLOW ARROW signal indication in a different section than the flashing YELLOW ARROW signal indication)</span>.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4G02_para03">03</span><span class="standard">During programmed changes into flashing mode, no green signal indication or flashing yellow signal indication shall be terminated and immediately followed by a steady red or flashing red signal indication without first displaying the steady yellow signal indication.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4G03">Section <span class="text_deleted">4D.30</span><span class="text_added">4G.03</span> Flashing Operation – Signal Indications <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">D</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">d</span>uring Flashing Mode</h3>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4G03_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">When a traffic control signal is operated in the flashing mode, a flashing yellow signal indication should be used for the major street and a flashing red signal indication should be used for the other approaches unless flashing red signal indications are used on all approaches.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4G03_para02">02</span><span class="standard">When a traffic control signal is operated in the flashing mode, all of the green signal indications at the signalized location shall be dark (non-illuminated) and shall not be displayed in either a steady or flashing manner, except for single-section GREEN ARROW signal indications as provided <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">elsewhere </span>in <span class="text_added change_from_npa"><a href="#section4G03_para06">Paragraph 6</a> of </span>this Section.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4G03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Flashing yellow signal indications shall be used on more than one approach to a signalized location only if those approaches do not conflict with each other.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4G03_para04">04</span><span class="standard">Except as provided in Paragraph 5<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> of this Section</span>, when a traffic control signal is operated in the flashing mode, one and only one signal indication in every signal face at the signalized location shall be flashed.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4G03_para05">05</span><span class="option">If a signal face has two identical CIRCULAR RED or RED ARROW signal indications (see <a href="part4e.xhtml#section4E04">Section <span class="text_deleted">4D.08</span><span class="text_added">4E.04</span></a>), both of those identical signal indications may be flashed simultaneously.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4G03_para06">06</span><span class="standard">No steady indications, other than a single-section signal face consisting of a continuously-displayed GREEN ARROW signal indication that is used alone to indicate a continuous movement in the steady (stop-and-go) mode, shall be displayed at the signalized location during the flashing mode. A single-section GREEN ARROW signal indication shall remain continuously-displayed when the traffic control signal is operated in the flashing mode.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4G03_para07">07</span><span class="standard">If a signal face includes both circular and arrow signal indications of the color that is to be flashed, only the circular signal indication shall be flashed.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4G03_para08">08</span><span class="standard">All signal faces that are flashed on an approach shall flash the same color, either yellow or red, except that separate turn signal faces (see <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F04">Sections <span class="text_deleted">4D.17</span><span class="text_added">4F.04</span></a><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F06">4F.06</a>, <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F08">4F.08</a>, <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F11">4F.11</a>, <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F13">4F.13</a>,</span> and <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F15"><span class="text_deleted">4D.21</span><span class="text_added">4F.15</span></a>) shall be permitted to flash a RED ARROW signal indication when the adjacent through movement signal indications are flashed yellow. Shared signal faces (see <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F03">Sections <span class="text_deleted">4D.17</span><span class="text_added">4F.03</span></a><span class="text_added change_from_npa"><a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F05">4F.05</a>, <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F07">4F.07</a>, <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F10">4F.10</a>, <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F12">4F.12</a>,</span> and <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F14"><span class="text_deleted">4D.21</span><span class="text_added">4F.14</span></a>) for turn movements shall not be permitted to flash a CIRCULAR RED signal indication when the adjacent through movement signal indications are flashed yellow.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4G03_para09">09</span><span class="standard">The appropriate RED ARROW or YELLOW ARROW signal indication shall be flashed when a signal face consists entirely of arrow indications. A signal face that consists entirely of arrow indications and that provides a protected only turn movement during the steady (stop-and-go) mode or that provides a flashing yellow arrow or flashing red arrow signal indication for a permissive turn movement during the steady (stop-and-go) mode shall be permitted to flash the YELLOW ARROW signal indication during the flashing mode if the adjacent through movement signal indications are flashed yellow and if it is intended that a permissive turn movement not requiring a full stop by each turning vehicle be provided during the flashing mode.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4G04">Section <span class="text_deleted">4D.31</span><span class="text_added">4G.04</span> Flashing Operation – Transition Out of Flashing Mode</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>416. In Section 4G.04 (existing Section 4D.31) Flashing Operation—Transition Out of Flashing Mode, FHWA proposes to add a new Guidance paragraph providing two recommended display sequences for transitioning out of yellow-red flashing mode where there is a common major-street green interval.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to revise the existing recommendation for display sequences for transitioning out of yellow-red flashing mode where there is not a common major-street green interval to provide a steady yellow signal indication followed by a steady red clearance interval on the major traffic movement on the major street.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA proposes these changes for safety and consistency in signal operations.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4G04_para01">01</span><span class="standard">All changes from flashing mode to steady (stop-and-go) mode shall be made under one of the following procedures:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Yellow-red flashing mode: Changes from flashing mode to steady (stop-and-go) mode shall be made at the beginning of the major-street green interval (when a green signal indication is displayed to through traffic in both directions on the major street), or if there is no common major-street green interval, at the beginning of the green interval for the major traffic movement on the major street.</li>

      <li>Red-red flashing mode: Changes from flashing mode to steady (stop-and-go) mode shall be made by changing the flashing red indications to steady red indications followed by appropriate green indications to begin the steady mode cycle. These green indications shall be the beginning of the major-street green interval (when a green signal indication is displayed to through traffic in both directions on the major street) or if there is no common major-street green interval, at the beginning of the green interval for the major traffic movement on the major street.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4G04_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">The steady red clearance interval provided during the change from red-red flashing mode to steady (stop-and-go) mode should have a <span class="text_added change_from_npa">minimum </span>duration of 6 seconds.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4G04_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">When changing from the yellow-red flashing mode to steady (stop-and-go) mode at a location where there is a common major-street green interval, the flashing red signal indications for the minor street should immediately change to steady red indications, and the flashing yellow signal indications for the through movements on the major street should change to green indications in both directions (after the minor-street signal indications have been steady red for a short time, if desired), or the flashing yellow signal indications for the through movements on the major street should change to steady yellow signal indications followed by a steady red clearance interval before changing to green signal indications in both directions.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4G04_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">When changing from the yellow-red flashing mode to steady (stop-and-go) mode<span class="text_deleted">, if there</span><span class="text_added">at a location where there</span> is no common major-street green interval, <span class="text_deleted">the provision of a steady red clearance interval for the other approaches before changing from a flashing yellow or a flashing red signal indication to a green signal indication on the major approach should be considered</span><span class="text_added">the flashing red signal indications for the minor street should immediately change to steady red indications, and the flashing yellow signal indications for the through movements on the major street should change to steady yellow signal indications followed by a steady red clearance interval before changing to green signal indications for the major traffic movement on the major street</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4G04_para05">05</span><span class="standard">During programmed changes out of flashing mode, no flashing yellow signal indication shall be terminated and immediately followed by a steady red or flashing red signal indication without first displaying <span class="text_deleted">the</span><span class="text_added">a</span> steady yellow signal indication.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4G04_para06">06</span><span class="option">Because special midblock signals that rest in flashing circular yellow in the position normally occupied by the green signal indication do not have a green signal indication in the signal face, these signals may go directly from flashing circular yellow (in the position normally occupied by the green signal indication) to steady yellow without going first to a green signal indication.</span></p>
    
  </div>
</body>
</html>