<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 4S - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter <span class="text_deleted">4L</span><span class="text_added">4S</span>. Flashing Beacons</h1>

    <h3 id="section4S01">Section <span class="text_deleted">4L.01</span><span class="text_added">4S.01</span> General Design and Operation of Flashing Beacons</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>438. In Section 4S.01 (existing Section 4L.01) General Design and Operation of Flashing Beacons, FHWA proposes to revise Standard P4 to discontinue the existing allowance of a beacon within the border of a sign for School Speed Limit Sign Beacons. FHWA proposes this change because under certain light and weather conditions, the flashing beacon causes irradiation that can obscure the sign message if the beacon is within the sign or too close to the sign legend. This proposal is consistent with research demonstrating the phenomenon of irradiation or disability glare (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1444-0938.2003.tb03080.x). FHWA also proposes a corresponding revision to Section 4S.04 (existing Section 4L.04) Speed Limit Sign
Beacon.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed. The corresponding revision to Section 4S.04 is moved to Section 2A.12 since it was more related to the appropriate use of LED units in the border of a sign.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to add Interchange Exit Direction signs with advisory speed panels as an exception to the Standard prohibiting flashing beacons within the border of the sign. FHWA proposes this revision to clarify the existing practice and for consistency with Figure 2E–27.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to add a new Standard establishing eight-inch and twelve-inch as the two nominal diameter sizes for flashing beacon signal indications in accordance with Official Ruling No.
4(09)–7(I) (http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/resources/interpretations/4_09_7.htm).
</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S01_para01">01</span><span class="support">A <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">F</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">f</span>lashing <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">B</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">b</span>eacon is a highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that operates in a flashing mode. It can provide traffic control when used as an intersection control beacon (see <a href="#section4S02">Section <span class="text_deleted">4L</span><span class="text_added">4S</span>.02</a>) or it can provide warning when used in other applications (see <a href="#section4S03">Sections <span class="text_deleted">4L</span><span class="text_added">4S</span>.03</a>, <a href="#section4S04"><span class="text_deleted">4L</span><span class="text_added">4S</span>.04</a>, and <a href="#section4S05"><span class="text_deleted">4L</span><span class="text_added">4S</span>.05</a>).</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S01_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Flashing <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">B</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">b</span>eacon units<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> and</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> their mountings<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, signal visors, and backplates</span> shall comply with the provisions of <a href="part4d.xhtml">Chapter<span class="text_added">s</span> 4D</a><span class="text_added"> and <a href="part4e.xhtml">4E</a></span>, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S01_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Beacons shall be flashed at a rate of not less than 50 or more than 60 times per minute. The illuminated period of each flash shall be a minimum of 1/2 and a maximum of 2/3 of the total cycle.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S01_para04">04</span><span class="standard">A beacon shall not be included within the border of a sign except for <span class="text_added">Interchange Exit Direction signs with advisory speed panels (see <a href="#section2E25">Sections 2E.25</a>)</span><span class="text_deleted">SCHOOL SPEED LIMIT sign beacons (see <a href="#section4S04">Sections 4L.04</a> and <a href="part7b.xhtml#section7B15">7B.15</a>)</span>.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4S01_para05">05</span><span class="standard">There shall be two nominal diameter sizes for flashing beacon signal indications: 8 inches and 12 inches.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S01_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">If used to supplement a warning or regulatory sign, the edge of the beacon signal housing should normally be located no closer than 12 inches outside of the nearest edge of the sign<span class="text_added"> or from the nearest edge of any of the signs and plaques in a sign assembly</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S01_para07">07</span><span class="option">An automatic dimming device may be used to reduce the brilliance of flashing yellow signal indications during night operation.</span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<span class="text_added"><p><span class="paranum" id="section4S01_para08">08</span><span class="option">Backplates (see <a href="part4d.xhtml#section4D06">Section 4D.06</a>) may be used with flashing beacons.</span></p></span>
	</div>

    <h3 id="section4S02">Section <span class="text_deleted">4L.02</span><span class="text_added">4S.02</span> Intersection Control Beacon</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>439. In Section 4S.02 (existing Section 4L.02) Intersection Control Beacon, FHWA proposes to add a new Standard requiring twelve-inch signal indications for Intersection Control Beacons facing approaches where road users view both flashing beacon indications and lane use control signal indications simultaneously or where the nearest flashing beacon signal face is more than 120 feet beyond the stop line, unless a supplemental near-side flashing beacon signal face is provided.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed with editorial revisions.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes a new Guidance recommending twelve-inch signal indications for Intersection Control Beacons facing approaches where the speed is 40 mph or higher or where post-mounted flashing beacon signal faces are used. FHWA proposes these changes to increase the signal indication visibility for the road users and for consistency with provisions for traffic control signals.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S02_para01">01</span><span class="standard">An Intersection Control Beacon shall consist of one or more signal faces directed toward each approach to an intersection. Each signal face shall consist of one or more signal sections of a standard traffic signal face, with flashing CIRCULAR YELLOW or CIRCULAR RED signal indications in each signal face. They shall be installed and used only at an intersection to control two or more directions of travel.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S02_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Application of Intersection Control Beacon signal indications shall be limited to the following:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Yellow on one route (normally the major street) and red for the remaining approaches<span class="text_added"> that are controlled by STOP signs</span>, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">and</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">or</span></li>

      <li>Red for all approaches (if <span class="text_deleted">the warrant described in <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B07">Section 2B.07</a> for a multi-way stop is satisfied</span><span class="text_added">all of the intersection approaches are controlled by STOP signs</span>).</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S02_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Flashing yellow signal indications shall not face conflicting vehicular approaches.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S02_para04">04</span><span class="standard">A STOP sign <span class="text_added">(see <a href="#section2B04">Sections 2B.04</a>) </span>shall be used on approaches to which a flashing red signal indication is displayed on an Intersection Control Beacon<span class="text_deleted"> (see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B04">Section 2B.04</a>)</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S02_para05">05</span><span class="standard">If two horizontally aligned red signal indications are used on an approach for an Intersection Control Beacon, they shall be flashed simultaneously to avoid being confused with grade crossing flashing-light signals. If two vertically aligned red signal indications <span class="text_added">that have a physical separation between them </span>are used on an approach for an Intersection Control Beacon, they shall be flashed alternately.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4S02_para06">06</span><span class="standard">Twelve-inch signal indications shall be used for Intersection Control Beacons facing approaches where:</span></p>
	<ol type="A" class="standard">
		<li>Road users view both <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">flashing beacon</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Intersection Control Beacon</span> and lane-use control signal indications simultaneously; or</li>
		<li>The nearest <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">flashing beacon</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Intersection Control Beacon</span> signal face is more than 120 feet beyond the stop line, unless a supplemental near-side <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">flashing beacon</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Intersection Control Beacon</span> signal face face is provided.</li>
	</ol>
	</span>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="text_added"><span class="paranum" id="section4S02_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">Twelve-inch signal indications should be used for Intersection Control Beacons facing approaches where:</span></span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
		<li>The posted or statutory speed limit or the 85th-percentile approach speed is higher than 40 mph<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> or</li>
		<li>Where only post-mounted flashing beacon signal faces are used.</li>
	</ol>
	</span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S02_para08">08</span><span class="guidance">An Intersection Control Beacon should not be mounted on a pedestal in the roadway unless the pedestal is within the confines of a traffic or pedestrian island.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S02_para09">09</span><span class="option">Supplemental signal indications may be used on one or more approaches in order to provide adequate visibility to approaching road users.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S02_para10">10</span><span class="option">Intersection Control Beacons may be used at intersections where traffic or physical conditions do not justify conventional traffic control signals but crash rates indicate the possibility of a special need.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S02_para11">11</span><span class="option">An Intersection Control Beacon is generally located over the center of an intersection; however, it may be used at other suitable locations.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4S03">Section <span class="text_deleted">4L.03</span><span class="text_added">4S.03</span> Warning Beacon</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>440. In Section 4S.03 (existing Section 4L.03) Warning Beacon, FHWA proposes to delete P5 requiring a minimum of 15 feet and a maximum of 19 feet clearance above the pavement for warning beacons suspended over the roadway. FHWA proposes this change because P2 in new Section 4S.01 adequately addresses clearances and in accordance with Official Ruling No. 4(09)–11(I) (https://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/ resources/interpretations/4_09_11.htm).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to modify P11 to specify that the BE PREPARED TO STOP (W3–4) sign and a WHEN FLASHING (W16–13P) plaque is the traffic signal warning sign assembly that may be used with the Warning Beacon interconnected with a traffic signal controller.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to add a Guidance statement to recommend the use of audible information devices with pedestrian-actuated Warning Beacons to assist pedestrians with visual disabilities. FHWA proposes this revision to provide additional assistance due to the potential lack of audible traffic cues.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA proposes adding a new Standard prohibiting the use of vibrotactile and percussive indications in conjunction with audible information devices at pedestrian-actuated Warning Beacons at a pedestrian crossing.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes a new Guidance recommending that, if used, the audible message should be a speech message that says, “Yellow lights are flashing” and should be spoken twice. FHWA proposes these changes because the vibrotactile and percussive indications are reserved for the Walk indication.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed except the speech message was changed to “Warning lights are flashing” based on comments received.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para01">01</span><span class="support">Typical applications of Warning Beacons include the following:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li><span class="text_deleted">At</span><span class="text_added">As supplemental emphasis to signs or object markers on or in front of</span> obstructions <span class="text_added">that are </span>in or immediately adjacent to the roadway;</li>

      <li>As supplemental emphasis to warning signs;</li>

      <li>As emphasis for midblock crosswalks;</li>

      <li>As supplemental emphasis to regulatory signs, except STOP, DO NOT ENTER, WRONG WAY, and SPEED LIMIT signs; and</li>

      <li>In conjunction with a regulatory or warning sign that includes the phrase WHEN FLASHING in its legend <span class="text_added">or on a supplemental plaque </span>to indicate that the regulation is in effect or that the condition is present only at certain times.<span class="text_added"> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">It is not appropriate to</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"><a href="part2a.xhtml#section2A12">Section 2A.12</a> prohibits the</span> use flashing light<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">-</span>emitting diode (LED) units within the legend or border of the sign <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">to inform road users that the regulation is in effect or that the condition is present</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">in conjunction with the phrase WHEN FLASHING in its legend or on a supplemental plaque</span>.</span></li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para02">02</span><span class="standard">A Warning Beacon shall consist of one or more signal sections of a standard traffic signal face with a flashing CIRCULAR YELLOW signal indication in each signal section.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">A Warning Beacon shall be used only to supplement an appropriate warning or regulatory sign or marker.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para04">04</span><span class="standard">Warning Beacons, if used at intersections, shall not face conflicting vehicular approaches.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="standard">If a Warning Beacon is suspended over the roadway, the clearance above the pavement shall be a minimum of 15 feet and a maximum of 19 feet.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">The condition or regulation justifying Warning Beacons should largely govern their location with respect to the roadway.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">If an obstruction is in or adjacent to the roadway, illumination of the lower portion or the beginning of the obstruction or <span class="text_added">illumination of </span><span class="text_deleted">a</span><span class="text_added">the</span> sign on or in front of the obstruction, in addition to the beacon, should be considered.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">Warning Beacons should be operated only during those periods or times when the condition or regulation exists.</span></p>

    

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para08">08</span><span class="option">If Warning Beacons have more than one signal section, they may be flashed either alternately or simultaneously.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para09">09</span><span class="option">A <span class="text_deleted">flashing yellow </span><span class="text_added">Warning B</span><span class="text_deleted">b</span>eacon interconnected with a traffic signal controller assembly may be used with a <span class="text_deleted">traffic signal warning sign</span><span class="text_added">BE PREPARED TO STOP (W3-4) sign and a WHEN FLASHING (W16-13P) plaque</span> (see <a href="part2c.xhtml#section2C35">Section 2C.<span class="text_added">35</span><span class="text_deleted">36</span></a>).</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para10">10</span><span class="option">Warning Beacons that are actuated by pedestrians, bicyclists, or other road users may be used as appropriate to provide additional warning to vehicles approaching a crossing or other location.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para11">11</span><span class="guidance">An audible information device should be used with pedestrian-actuated Warning Beacons to assist pedestrians with visual disabilities.</span></p>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para12">12</span><span class="standard">If an audible information device is used in conjunction with a pedestrian-actuated Warning Beacon at a pedestrian crossing, the audible information device shall not use vibrotactile indications or percussive indications.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S03_para13">13</span><span class="guidance">If an audible information device is used in conjunction with a pedestrian-actuated Warning Beacon at a pedestrian crossing, the audible message should be a speech message that says, "<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Yellow</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Warning</span> lights are flashing." The audible message should be spoken twice.</span></p>
	</span>

    <h3 id="section4S04">Section <span class="text_deleted">4L.04</span><span class="text_added">4S.04</span> Speed Limit Sign Beacon</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>441. In Section 4S.04 (existing Section 4L.04) Speed Limit Sign Beacon, FHWA proposes to delete the second sentence of P2 to provide agencies more flexibility in arranging two or more indications.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to modify P3 to expand the provision beyond two signal indications to address situations where four signal indications are used.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change in P3 is adopted as proposed. Also, P4 is deleted, to reflect Official Change Request 4(09)-30 (C).</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S04_para01">01</span><span class="standard">A Speed Limit Sign Beacon shall be used only to supplement a Speed Limit sign.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S04_para02">02</span><span class="standard">A Speed Limit Sign Beacon shall consist of one or more signal sections of a standard traffic control signal face, with a flashing CIRCULAR YELLOW signal indication in each signal section. <span class="text_deleted">The signal indications shall have a nominal diameter of not less than 8 inches. If two signal indications are used, they shall be vertically aligned, except that they shall be permitted to be horizontally aligned if the Speed Limit (R2-1) sign is longer horizontally than vertically. </span>If two <span class="text_added">or more </span>signal indications are used, they shall be alternately flashed.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S04_para03">03</span><span class="option">A Speed Limit Sign Beacon may be used with a fixed or variable Speed Limit sign. If applicable, a flashing Speed Limit Sign Beacon (with an appropriate accompanying sign) may be used to indicate that the displayed speed limit is in effect.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="option">A Speed Limit Sign Beacon may be included within the border of a School Speed Limit (S5-1) sign (see <a href="part7b.xhtml#section7B15">Section 7B.15</a>).</span></p></span>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_deleted"><span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="standard">Flashing light emitting diode (LED) units shall not be used within the legend or border of a Speed Limit sign to indicate that the displayed speed limit is in effect.</span></p>
	</span></span></div>

    <h3 id="section4S05">Section <span class="text_deleted">4L.05</span><span class="text_added">4S.05</span> Stop Beacon</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>442. In Section 4S.05 (existing Section 4L.05) Stop Beacon, FHWA proposes to change P3 from Standard to Guidance to provide agencies flexibility in designing and installing the Stop Beacon with the Stop, Do Not Enter, and Wrong Way signs.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4S05_para01">01</span><span class="standard">A Stop Beacon shall be used only to supplement a STOP sign, a DO NOT ENTER sign, or a WRONG WAY sign.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4S05_para02">02</span><span class="standard">A Stop Beacon shall consist of one or more signal sections of a standard traffic signal face with a flashing CIRCULAR RED signal indication in each signal section. If two horizontally aligned signal indications are used for a Stop Beacon, they shall be flashed simultaneously to avoid being confused with grade crossing flashing-light signals. If two vertically<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">-</span>aligned signal indications are used for a Stop Beacon, they shall be flashed alternately.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section4S05_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The <span class="text_deleted">bottom</span><span class="text_added">edge</span> of the signal housing of a Stop Beacon <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be not less than 12 inches or more than 24 inches <span class="text_deleted">above the top </span><span class="text_added">from the nearest edge </span>of <span class="text_deleted">a</span><span class="text_added">the</span> STOP sign, <span class="text_deleted">a </span>DO NOT ENTER sign, or <span class="text_deleted">a </span>WRONG WAY sign<span class="text_added"> that is supplements</span>.</span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>