<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 5D - MUTCD 11th Edition NPA - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 5E. Markings</h1>

    <h3 id="section5E01">Section 5E.01 Introduction</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5E01_para01">01</span><span class="support">The purpose of markings on highways is to provide guidance and information for road users regarding roadway conditions and restrictions.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section5E01_para02">02</span><span class="support">The provisions for markings and delineators, in general, are contained in <a href="part3_toc.html">Part 3</a> and in other Sections of this Manual. Provisions for markings that are specific to low-volume roads are contained in this Chapter.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section5E02">Section 5E.02 Center Line Markings</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5E02_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Where center line markings are installed, no-passing zone markings in compliance with <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B02">Section 3B.02</a> shall also be installed.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5E02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Center line markings should be used on paved low-volume roads consistent with the principles of this Manual and with the policies and practices of the road agency and on the basis of either an engineering study or the application of engineering judgment.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5E02_para03">03</span><span class="option">Center line markings may be placed on highways with or without edge line markings.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section5E03">Section 5E.03 Edge Line Markings</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5E03_para01">01</span><span class="support">The purpose of edge line markings is to delineate the left-hand or right-hand edge of the roadway.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5E03_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Edge line markings should be considered for use on paved low-volume roads based on engineering judgment or an engineering study.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5E03_para03">03</span><span class="option">Edge line markings may be placed on highways with or without center line markings.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section5E03_para04">04</span><span class="option">Edge line markings may be placed on paved low-volume roads for roadway features such as horizontal curves, narrow bridges, pavement width transitions, curvilinear alignment, and at other locations based on engineering judgment or an engineering study.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section5E04">Section 5E.04 Delineators</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5E04_para01">01</span><span class="support">The purpose of delineators is to enhance driver safety where it is desirable to call attention to a changed or changing condition such as abrupt roadway narrowing or curvature.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5E04_para02">02</span><span class="option">Delineators may be used on low-volume roads based on engineering judgment, such as for curves, T-intersections, and abrupt changes in the roadway width. In addition, they may be used to mark the location of driveways or other minor roads entering the low-volume road.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section5E05">Section 5E.05 Other Markings</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5E05_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Other markings, such as stop lines, crosswalks, pavement legends, channelizing devices, and islands, used on low-volume roads shall comply with the provisions contained in this Manual.</span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>