<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 4B - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 4B. Traffic Control Signals—General</h1>

    <h3 id="section4B01">Section 4B.01 General</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4B01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Words such as pedestrians and bicyclists are used redundantly in selected Sections of <a href="part4_toc.html">Part 4</a> to encourage sensitivity to these elements of “traffic.”</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4B01_para02">02</span><span class="support">Standards for traffic control signals are important because traffic control signals need to attract the attention of a variety of road users, including those who are older, those with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">impaired </span>vision<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> disabilities</span>, as well as those who are fatigued or distracted, or who are not expecting to encounter a signal at a particular location.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section4B02">Section <span class="text_deleted">4B.03</span><span class="text_added">4B.02</span> Advantages and Disadvantages of Traffic Control Signals</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4B02_para01">01</span><span class="support">When properly used, traffic control signals are valuable devices for the control of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. They <span class="text_deleted">assign the right-of-way to</span><span class="text_added">control</span> the various traffic movements <span class="text_added">by alternating between directing them to stop and permitting them to proceed </span>and thereby profoundly influence traffic flow.<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> This accomplishes the need to safely separate road users in time in order to prevent crashes.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4B02_para02">02</span><span class="support">Traffic control signals that are properly designed, located, operated, and maintained will have one or more of the following advantages:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
		<li>They reduce the frequency and severity of certain types of crashes, especially right-angle collisions<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> and those involving vulnerable road users</span>.</li>
      <li>They provide for the orderly movement of traffic.</li>

      <li>They increase the traffic-handling capacity of the intersection if: 

      <ol>
        <li>Proper physical layouts and control measures are used, and</li>

        <li>The signal operational parameters are reviewed and updated (if needed) on a regular basis (as engineering judgment determines that significant traffic flow and/or land use changes have occurred) to maximize the ability of the traffic control signal to satisfy current traffic demands.</li>
      </ol></li>

      

      <li>They are coordinated to provide for continuous or nearly continuous movement of traffic at a definite speed along a given route under favorable conditions.</li>

      <li>They are used to interrupt heavy traffic at intervals to permit other traffic, vehicular or pedestrian, to cross.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4B02_para03">03</span><span class="support">Traffic control signals are often considered a panacea for all traffic problems at intersections. This belief has led to traffic control signals being installed at many locations where they are not needed, adversely affecting the safety and efficiency of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">vehicular</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">motor vehicle</span>, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4B02_para04">04</span><span class="support">Traffic control signals, even when justified by traffic and roadway conditions, can be ill-designed, ineffectively placed, improperly operated, or poorly maintained. Improper or unjustified traffic control signals can result in one or more of the following disadvantages:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Excessive delay,</li>

      <li>Excessive disobedience of the signal indications,</li>

      <li>Increased use of less adequate routes as road users attempt to avoid the traffic control signals, and</li>

      <li>Significant increases in the frequency of collisions (especially rear-end collisions).</li>
    </ol>

	<h3 id="section4B03">Section <span class="text_deleted">4B.04</span><span class="text_added">4B.03</span> Alternatives to Traffic Control Signals</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>388. In Section 4B.05 (existing Section 4B.04) Alternatives to Traffic Control Signals, FHWA proposes to clarify in Option Item M that to reduce vehicular conflicts, a roundabout is an alternative to a traffic control signal</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">This Section is renumbered to 4B.03 and the change is adopted as proposed but edited to place “installing a roundabout” as item B and remove “to reduce vehicular conflicts” since there may be other reasons for installing a roundabout. Also, item B is further revised to highlight other alternatives that can be considered if pedestrian safety is the major concern at the location.</p>

	<p>In addition, FHWA proposes to add a Support statement referencing Part 8 regarding installation of roundabouts in proximity to grade crossings. FHWA proposes these changes to reflect Official Change Request 4(09)–76(C).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4B03_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Since vehicular delay and the frequency of some types of crashes are sometimes <span class="text_deleted">greater</span><span class="text_added">higher</span> under traffic signal control than under STOP sign control, consideration should be given to providing alternatives to traffic control signals even if one or more of the signal warrants <span class="text_added change_from_npa">(see <a href="part4c.xhtml">Chapter 4C</a>) </span>has been satisfied.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4B03_para02">02</span><span class="option">These alternatives may include, but are not limited to, the following:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="option">
      <li>Installing signs along the major street to warn road users approaching the intersection;</li>

		<li>Installing a roundabout<span class="text_added"> to reduce <span class="change_from_npa">fatal and serious injury crashes and </span>vehicular conflicts<span class="change_from_npa"> that result in fatal and serious injury crashes (see <a href="part8a.xhtml#section8A12">Section 8A.12</a> if the location is in close proximity to a grade crossing)</span></span>; and</li>

		<li>Installing a pedestrian hybrid beacon (see <a href="part4j.xhtml">Chapter <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">4F</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">4J</span></a>)<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, rectangular rapid flashing beacon (see <a href="part4l.xhtml">Chapter 4L</a>), pedestrian-actuated Warning Beacons (see <a href="part4s.xhtml">Chapter 4S</a>)</span> or In-Roadway Warning Lights (see <a href="part4u.xhtml">Chapter <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">4N</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">4U</span></a>) if pedestrian safety is the major concern;</li>

      <li>Relocating the stop line(s) and making other changes to improve the sight distance at the intersection;</li>

      <li>Installing measures designed to reduce speeds on the approaches;</li>

      <li>Installing a flashing beacon at the intersection to supplement STOP sign control;</li>

      <li>Installing flashing beacons on warning signs in advance of a STOP <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">sign </span>controlled intersection on <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the </span>major-<span class="text_added change_from_npa">street</span> and/or minor-street approaches;</li>

      <li>Adding one or more lanes on a minor-street approach to reduce the number of vehicles per lane on the approach;</li>

      <li>Revising the geometrics at the intersection to channelize vehicular movements and reduce the time required for a vehicle to complete a movement, which could also assist pedestrians;</li>

      <li>Revising the geometrics at the intersection to add pedestrian median refuge islands and/or curb extensions;</li>

      <li>Installing roadway lighting if a disproportionate number of crashes occur at night;</li>

      <li>Restricting one or more turning movements, perhaps on a time-of-day basis, if alternate routes are available;</li>

      <li>If the warrant is satisfied, installing multi-way STOP <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">sign </span>control;</li>

      <li>Employing other alternatives, depending on conditions at the intersection.</li>
    </ol>

	<span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4B03_para03">03</span><span class="support change_from_npa">Where installation of a roundabout as an alternative to a traffic control signal is in close proximity to a grade crossing, refer to Section 8C.12 for additional information.</span></p></span>

	<h3 id="section4B04">Section <span class="text_deleted">4B.02</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">4B.04</span> Basis of Installation <span class="text_deleted">or Removal </span>of Traffic Control Signals</h3>
	
	<div class="npa">
	<p>386. In Section 4B.02, retitled, “Basis of Installation of Traffic Control Signals,” FHWA proposes to add a Guidance paragraph recommending against using traffic control signals to penalize drivers who are speeding. FHWA proposes this change because speeding issues should be addressed through a programmatic approach and through roadway design features, rather than through traffic control signals.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is not adopted, based on the comments received. The commenters wanted to preserve the “rest-in-red” operation and to maintain existing flexibility for implementing traffic control signal operation strategies consistent with “Vision Zero” and a Safe System approach to enhance safety for vulnerable road users.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">This Section is also renumbered to 4B.04 based on other revisions.</p>
	</div>    

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4B04_para01">01</span><span class="support">A careful analysis of traffic operations, pedestrian and bicyclist needs, and other factors at a large number of signalized and unsignalized locations, coupled with engineering judgment, has provided a series of signal warrants, described in <a href="part4c.xhtml">Chapter 4C</a>, that define the minimum conditions under which installing traffic control signals might be justified.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4B04_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">The <span class="text_deleted">selection and use</span><span class="text_added">design (including the phasing, operation, and timing)</span> of <span class="text_added">new </span>traffic control signals should be based on an engineering study of roadway, traffic, and other conditions.</span></p>

	<span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance change_from_npa">Traffic control signals should not be installed or operated for the purpose of penalizing drivers who are speeding, especially in conjunction with signs that have a legend that informs drivers that speeding triggers a red light.</span></p></span>

	<h3 id="section4B05"><span class="text_added">Section 4B.05 Basis of Removal of Traffic Control Signals</span></h3>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4B05_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Engineering judgment should be applied in the review of operating traffic control signals to determine whether the type of installation and the timing program meet the current requirements of all forms of traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4B05_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">If changes in traffic patterns eliminate the need for a traffic control signal, consideration should be given to removing it and replacing it with appropriate alternative traffic control devices, if any are needed.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4B05_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">If the engineering study indicates that the traffic control signal is no longer justified, and a decision is made to remove the signal, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the </span>removal should be accomplished using the following steps:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>Determine the appropriate traffic control to be used after <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the </span>removal of the signal.</li>

      <li>Remove any sight-distance restrictions as necessary.</li>

      <li>Inform the public of the removal study.</li>

      <li>Flash or cover the signal heads for a minimum of 90 days, and install the appropriate <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">stop</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">STOP sign</span> control or other traffic control devices.</li>

      <li>Remove the signal if the engineering data collected during the removal study period confirms that the signal is no longer needed.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4B05_para04">04</span><span class="option">Because Items C, D, and E in <a href="#section4B05_para03">Paragraph <span class="text_deleted">5</span><span class="text_added">3</span></a><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> of this Section</span> are not relevant when a temporary traffic control signal (see <a href="part4d.xhtml#section4D11">Section 4D.<span class="text_added">11</span><span class="text_deleted">32</span></a>) is removed, a temporary traffic control signal may be removed immediately after Items A and B are completed.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4B03_para05">05</span><span class="option">Instead of total removal of a traffic control signal, the poles, controller cabinet, and cables may remain in place after removal of the signal heads for continued analysis.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><h3>Section 4B.05 Adequate Roadway Capacity</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>387. FHWA proposes to delete existing Section 4B.05
Adequate Roadway Capacity because the information does not relate to traffic control uniformity and instead discusses roadway design philosophy and therefore is not appropriate in the MUTCD.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="support">The delays inherent in the alternating assignment of right-of-way at intersections controlled by traffic control signals can frequently be reduced by widening the major roadway, the minor roadway, or both roadways. Widening the minor roadway often benefits the operations on the major roadway, because it reduces the green time that must be assigned to minor-roadway traffic. In urban areas, the effect of widening can be achieved by eliminating parking on intersection approaches. It is desirable to have at least two lanes for moving traffic on each approach to a signalized location. Additional width on the departure side of the intersection, as well as on the approach side, will sometimes be needed to clear traffic through the intersection effectively.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/><span class="guidance">Adequate roadway capacity should be provided at a signalized location. Before an intersection is widened, the additional green time pedestrians need to cross the widened roadways should be considered to determine if it will exceed the green time saved through improved vehicular flow.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance">Other methods of increasing the roadway capacity at signalized locations that do not involve roadway widening, such as revisions to the pavement markings and the careful evaluation of proper lane-use assignments (including varying the lane use by time of day), should be considered where appropriate. Such consideration should include evaluation of any impacts that changes to pavement markings and lane assignments will have on bicycle travel.</span></p></span>
  </div>
</body>
</html>