<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 7D - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 7D. Crossing Supervision</h1>

    <span class="text_deleted">
	<h3>Section 7D.01 Types of Crossing Supervision</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span><br/> </span><span class="support">There are three types of school crossing supervision:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Adult control of pedestrians and vehicles by adult crossing guards,</li>

      <li>Adult control of pedestrians and vehicles by uniformed law enforcement officers, and</li>

      <li>Student and/or parent control of only pedestrians with student and/or parent patrols.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="support">Information regarding the organization, administration, and operation of a school safety patrol program is contained in the “AAA School Safety Patrol Operations Manual” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>).</span></p></span>

    <span class="text_deleted"><h3 id="section7D02">Section 7D.02 Adult Crossing Guards</h3></span>

    <h3 id="section7D01">Section <span class="text_deleted">7D.03</span><span class="text_added">7D.01</span> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Qualifications of </span>Adult Crossing Guards</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>526. In Section 7D.01 (existing Section 7D.03) “Qualifications of Adult Crossing Guards,” FHWA proposes to incorporate the existing Option from existing Section 7D.02.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The proposed changes are adopted as proposed, except for the following:</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">A new Support paragraph is added about the additional conspicuity adult crossing guards can add to a school crossing.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">Also, based on numerous comments questioning the appropriateness of including specific minimum qualifications for adult crossing guards in the MUTCD, the existing Guidance text on minimum qualifications is removed and, in its place, a new Guidance paragraph is added that jurisdictions should have policies and procedures for the selection, qualifications, and training of adult crossing guards.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">Lastly, because of the removal specific qualifications from this section, the section title is changed to "Adult Crossing Guards".</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section7D01_para01">01</span><span class="option">Adult crossing guards may be used to provide gaps in traffic at school crossings where an engineering study has shown that adequate gaps need to be created<span class="text_deleted"> (see <a href="part7a.xhtml#section7A03">Section 7A.03</a>)</span>, and where authorized by law.</span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="support">A recommended method for determining the frequency and adequacy of gaps in the traffic stream is given in the “Traffic Control Devices Handbook” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>).</span></p>
	</span>

	<span class="text_added change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section7D01_para02">02</span><span class="support">Adult crossing guards can also add conspicuity at the crossing where children, who are typically smaller in stature, might not be as visible.</span></p>
	</span>
	</div>

    <p><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span><br/> </span></span><span class="paranum" id="section7D01_para03">03</span><span class="support">High standards for selection of adult crossing guards are essential because they are responsible for the safety of and the efficient crossing of the street by schoolchildren within and in the immediate vicinity of school crosswalks.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section7D01_para04">04</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Jurisdictions should have policies and procedures for the qualifications, selection, and training of adult crossing guards.</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Adult crossing guards should possess the following minimum qualifications:</span></span></p>

    <div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>Average intelligence;</li>

      <li>Good physical condition, including sight, hearing, and ability to move and maneuver quickly in order to avoid danger from errant vehicles;</li>

      <li>Ability to control a STOP paddle effectively to provide approaching road users with a clear, fully direct view of the paddle’s STOP message during the entire crossing movement;</li>

      <li>Ability to communicate specific instructions clearly, firmly, and courteously;</li>

      <li>Ability to recognize potentially dangerous traffic situations and warn and manage students in sufficient time to avoid injury.</li>

      <li>Mental alertness;</li>

      <li>Neat appearance;</li>

      <li>Good character;</li>

      <li>Dependability; and</li>

      <li>An overall sense of responsibility for the safety of students.</li>
    </ol></span></div>

    <span class="text_deleted"><h3>Section 7D.04 Uniform of Adult Crossing Guards</h3></span>

    <h3 id="section7D02">Section <span class="text_deleted">7D.05</span><span class="text_added">7D.02</span> Operating Procedures for Adult Crossing Guards</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>527. In Section 7D.02 (existing Section 7D.05) “Operating Procedures for Adult Crossing Guards,” FHWA proposes to incorporate the existing Standard from existing Section 7D.04.</p>
	<p>Also, FHWA proposes to add a Standard requiring that the STOP paddle comply with the provisions for a STOP/SLOW paddle and provide a reference to Section 6D.02 for information. FHWA also adds a reference to STOP paddles in Section 6D.02. Note: this proposed new language is intended to state an existing requirement specifically regarding the provisions of the STOP paddle and is not a new requirement.</p>
	<p>Lastly, FHWA proposes to delete existing Options P4 and P5 and Standard P6 regarding the flashing lights because it is redundant information that is contained in Section 6E.03.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The changes are adopted as proposed, except in P1 the ANSI standard for apparel is updated to the latest (2020) edition, consistent with updates in Section 1A.05.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">A suggestion by a commenter that the existing text in P2 should be revised to indicate how adult crossing guards are to operate at a signalized intersection is not adopted, because the existing text adequately describes that a crossing guard creates gaps in traffic flow. At a signal, the guard typically creates gaps in the flow of turning movements on green to enable school children to cross without conflicts.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section7D02_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Law enforcement officers performing school crossing supervision and adult crossing guards shall wear high-visibility retroreflective safety apparel labeled as ANSI 107-<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">2004</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">2020</span> standard performance for Class 2<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, Type R,</span> as described in <a href="part6c.xhtml#section6C05">Section <span class="text_deleted">6E.02</span><span class="text_added">6C.05</span></a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span><br/> </span></span><span class="paranum" id="section7D02_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Adult crossing guards shall not direct traffic in the usual law enforcement regulatory sense. In the control of traffic, they shall pick opportune times to create a sufficient gap in the traffic flow. At these times, they shall stand in the roadway to indicate that pedestrians are about to use or are using the crosswalk, and that all vehicular traffic must stop.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section7D02_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Adult crossing guards shall use a STOP paddle. The STOP paddle shall be the primary hand-signaling device.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section7D02_para04">04</span><span class="standard">The STOP paddle shall comply with the provisions for a STOP/SLOW paddle (see <a href="part6d.xhtml#section6D02">Section 6D.02</a>) except both sides shall be a STOP face.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section7D02_para05">05</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">The STOP (R1-1) paddle shall be an octagonal shape. The background of the STOP face shall be red with at least 6-inch series upper-case white letters and border. The paddle shall be at least 18 inches in size and have the word message STOP on both sides. </span>The paddle shall be <span class="text_deleted">retroreflectorized</span><span class="text_added">retroreflective</span> or illuminated when used during hours of darkness.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted">
	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span><br/> </span><span class="option">The STOP paddle may be modified to improve conspicuity by incorporating white or red flashing lights on both sides of the paddle. Among the types of flashing lights that may be used are individual LEDs or groups of LEDs.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option">The white or red flashing lights or LEDs may be arranged in any of the following patterns:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="option">
      <li>Two white or red lights centered vertically above and below the STOP legend,</li>

      <li>Two white or red lights centered horizontally on each side of the STOP legend,</li>

      <li>One white or red light centered below the STOP legend,</li>

      <li>A series of eight or more small white or red lights having a diameter of 1/4 inch or less along the outer edge of the paddle, arranged in an octagonal pattern at the eight corners of the STOP paddle (more than eight lights may be used only if the arrangement of the lights is such that it clearly conveys the octagonal shape of the STOP paddle), or</li>

      <li>A series of white lights forming the shapes of the letters in the legend.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span><br/> </span><span class="standard">If flashing lights are used on the STOP paddle, the flash rate shall be at least 50, but no more than 60, flash periods per minute.</span></p>
	</span>
  </div>
</body>
</html>