<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 6M - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <span class="text_added"><h1>Chapter 6M. TTC Zone Design Features and <span class="text_added change_from_npa">Safety </span>Devices<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> that are not Traffic Control Devices</span></h1></span>

    <span class="text_added">
	<h3 id="section6M01">Section 6M.01 General</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>503. FHWA proposes to add a new Section 6M.01 General, consisting of a Support statement to introduce the proposed new Chapter 6M, in which is grouped the existing information concerning TTC zone design features and devices that are not traffic control devices.
</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">This new section is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Although certain devices and design features, such as lighting, barriers, dividers, crash cushions, and screens, are sometimes used in TTC zones to supplement traffic control devices or enhance traffic operations or safety for road users, they are not considered to be traffic control devices. The following Sections describe the most commonly used of such devices and design features. <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">See also </span><a href="part1d.xhtml#section1D4">Section 1D.04</a> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">for</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">contains</span> additional information<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> about these devices and design features</span>.</span></p>
	</span>

	<h3 id="section6M02">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.85</span><span class="text_added">6M.02</span> <span class="text_added">Positive Protection and </span>Temporary Traffic Barriers</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>504. In Section 6M.02 (existing Section 6F.85) Positive Protection and Temporary Traffic Barriers, FHWA proposes to change P4 from Guidance to Standard to improve worker safety within the work zone. FHWA also proposes to revise existing P8 and delete P9 and P10 to broaden the description of movable barriers.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">These changes are adopted as proposed, except with editorial changes to the text of Paragraph 8 to eliminate two uses of the word "may" in a Support paragraph.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="change_from_npa"><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6M02_para01">01</span><span class="support">Temporary traffic barriers, including <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">shifting </span>portable or movable barriers, are devices designed to help prevent penetration by vehicles while minimizing injuries to vehicle occupants, and to protect workers, bicyclists, and pedestrians.</span></p>

	<p><span class="change_from_npa"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span></span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted">Because the protective requirements of a TTC situation have priority in determining the need for temporary traffic barriers, their use should be based on an engineering study.</span><span class="text_added"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">The need for longitudinal barrier and other positive protection devices shall be based on an engineering study. A</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Except as otherwise required, a</span>t a minimum, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">longitudinal traffic barriers and/or other </span>positive protection devices <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">shall</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">should</span> be considered in work zone situations that place workers at increased risk from motorized traffic, and where positive protection devices offer the highest potential for increased safety for workers and road users.</span></span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M02_para03">03</span><span class="support">Consider<span class="text_added change_from_npa">ations for</span> positive protection <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">under</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">include, but are not limited to,</span> the following circumstances:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Work zones that provide workers no means of escape from motorized traffic such as tunnels or bridges;</li>

      <li>Long-term stationary work zones of two weeks or more resulting in substantial worker exposure to motorized traffic;</li>

      <li>Projects with anticipated operating speeds of 45 mph or greater, especially when combined with high traffic volumes;</li>

      <li>Work operations that place workers<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, pedestrians, or bicyclists</span> close to travel lanes open to traffic; and</li>

		<li>Roadside hazards, such as drop-offs or unfinished bridge decks, that will remain in place overnight or longer.</li>
    </ol>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6M02_para04">04</span><span class="support">Work zone setups vary depending on the nature of the positive protection used.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6M02_para05">05</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">For additional guidance refer to </span>23 CFR Part 630.1108(a)<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> contains additional requirements for certain projects</span>.</span></p>
	</span>

    

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support">The four primary functions of temporary traffic barriers are:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>To keep vehicular traffic from entering work areas, such as excavations or material storage sites;</li>

      <li>To separate workers, bicyclists, and pedestrians from motor vehicle traffic;</li>

      <li>To separate opposing directions of vehicular traffic; and</li>

      <li>To separate vehicular traffic, bicyclists, and pedestrians from the work area such as false work for bridges and other exposed objects.</li>
    </ol></span>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M02_para06">06</span><span class="option">Temporary traffic barriers may be used to separate two-way vehicular traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M02_para07">07</span><span class="standard">Temporary traffic barriers shall be supplemented with standard delineation, pavement markings, or channelizing devices for improved daytime and nighttime visibility if they are used to channelize vehicular traffic. The delineation color shall match the applicable pavement marking color.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6M02_para08">08</span><span class="standard">Temporary traffic barriers, including their end treatments, shall be crashworthy<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> (see definition in <a href ="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a>)</span>.<span class="text_deleted"> In order to mitigate the effect of striking the upstream end of a temporary traffic barrier, the end shall be installed in accordance with AASHTO’s “Roadside Design Guide” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>) by flaring until the end is outside the acceptable clear zone or by providing crashworthy end treatments.</span></span></p>

	<p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6M02_para09">09</span><span class="standard">Short intermittent segments of temporary traffic barrier shall not be used because they nullify the containment and redirective capabilities of the temporary traffic barrier, increase the potential for serious injury both to vehicle occupants and pedestrians, and encourage the presence of blunt, leading ends. <span class="text_deleted">All upstream leading ends that are present shall be appropriately flared or protected with properly installed and maintained crashworthy cushions. </span>Adjacent temporary traffic barrier segments shall be properly connected in order to provide the overall strength required for the temporary traffic barrier to perform properly.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M02_para10">10</span><span class="option"><span class="text_deleted">W</span><span class="text_added">Steady-burn w</span>arning lights <span class="text_added">(see <a href="part6l.xhtml#section6L07">Section 6L.07</a>)</span><span class="text_deleted">or steady-burn lamps </span>may be mounted on temporary traffic barrier installations.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M02_para11">11</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Movable barriers</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Temporary traffic barrier</span> <span class="text_deleted">are capable of being repositioned laterally using a transfer vehicle that travels along the barrier. Movable barriers enable short-term closures to be installed and removed on long-term projects. Providing a barrier-protected work space for short-term closures and providing unbalanced flow to accommodate changes in the direction of peak-period traffic flows are two of the advantages of using movable barriers.</span><span class="text_added"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">may </span>include<span class="text_added change_from_npa">s</span> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">movable</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">portable</span> concrete, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">movable</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">portable</span> steel<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> or <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">highly mobile</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">movable</span> barriers<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">. Movable barriers may</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, which can all</span> be moved laterally and/or longitudinally when needed and/or from site to site. </span>More specific information on the use of temporary traffic barriers is contained in Chapters 8 and 9 of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">AASHTO’s </span>“Roadside Design Guide<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span>” <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">(see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>)</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">4th Edition, 2011, AASHTO</span>.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support">Figure 6H-45 shows a temporary reversible lane using movable barriers. The notable feature of the movable barrier is that in both Phase A and Phase B, the lanes used by opposing traffic are separated by a barrier.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support">Figure 6H-34 shows an exterior lane closure using a temporary traffic barrier. Notes 7 though 9 address the option of using a movable barrier. By using a movable barrier, the barrier can be positioned to close the lane during the off-peak periods and can be relocated to open the lane during peak periods to accommodate peak traffic flows. With one pass of the transfer vehicle, the barrier can be moved out of the lane and onto the shoulder. Furthermore, if so desired, with a second pass of the transfer vehicle, the barrier could be moved to the roadside beyond the shoulder.</span></p></span>

	<h3 id="section6M03">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.75</span><span class="text_added">6M.03</span> Temporary Raised Islands</h3>


    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M03_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Temporary raised islands shall be used only in combination with pavement striping and other suitable channelizing devices.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M03_para02">02</span><span class="option">A temporary raised island may be used to separate vehicular traffic flows in two-lane, two-way operations on roadways having a vehicular traffic volume range of 4,000 to 15,000 average daily traffic (ADT) and on freeways having a vehicular traffic volume range of 22,000 ADT to 60,000 ADT.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6M03_para03">03</span><span class="option">Temporary raised islands also may be used in other than two-lane, two-way operations where physical separation of vehicular traffic from the TTC zone is not required.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M03_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Temporary raised islands should have the basic dimensions of 4 inches high by at least 12 inches wide and have rounded or chamfered corners.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6M03_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">The temporary raised islands should not be designed in such a manner that they would cause a motorist to lose control of the vehicle if the vehicle inadvertently strikes the temporary raised island. If struck, pieces of the island should not be dislodged to the extent that they could penetrate the occupant compartment or involve other vehicles.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M03_para06">06</span><span class="standard">At pedestrian crossing locations, temporary raised islands shall have an opening or be shortened to provide at least a 60-inch wide <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">pathway</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">passageway</span> for the crossing pedestrian.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section6M04">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.74</span><span class="text_added">6M.04</span> Detectable Edging for Pedestrians</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>505. In Section 6M.04 (existing Section 6F.74) Detectable Edging for Pedestrians, FHWA proposes to eliminate the first portion of the first sentence in P2 that refers to a level of usage by pedestrians with disabilities as a basis for taking certain accessibility related actions because the need to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act does not depend on the frequency with which the facility is used by pedestrians with disabilities and to correct the edging distance in the second sentence of existing P2 from 6 inches to 8 inches to be consistent with new Section 6K.02.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">These changes are adopted as proposed, except that an editorial change is made to the text of Paragraph 2 to replace "protrude" with "extend".
</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M04_para01">01</span><span class="support">Individual channelizing devices, tape or rope used to connect individual devices, other discontinuous barriers and devices, and pavement markings are not detectable by persons with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vision</span> disabilities and are incapable of providing detectable path guidance on temporary or realigned sidewalks or other pedestrian facilities.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M04_para02">02</span> <span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted">When it is determined that a facility should be accessible to and detectable by pedestrians with visual disabilities, a</span><span class="text_added">A</span> continuously detectable edging should be provided throughout the length of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">the</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">a temporary pedestrian</span> facility such that it can be followed by pedestrians using long canes for guidance. This edging should <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">protrude</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">extend</span> at least <span class="text_deleted">6</span><span class="text_added">8</span> inches above the surface of the sidewalk or pathway, with the bottom of the edging a maximum of 2 inches above the surface. This edging should be continuous throughout the length of the facility except for gaps at locations where pedestrians or vehicles will be turning or crossing. This edging should consist of a prefabricated or formed-in-place curbing or other continuous device that is placed along the edge of the sidewalk or walkway. This edging should be firmly attached to the ground or to other devices. Adjacent sections of this edging should be interconnected such that the edging is not displaced by pedestrian or vehicular traffic or work operations, and such that it does not constitute a hazard to pedestrians, workers, or other road users.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M04_para03">03</span><span class="support">Examples of detectable edging for pedestrians include:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Prefabricated lightweight sections of plastic, metal, or other suitable materials that are interconnected and fixed in place to form a continuous edge.</li>

      <li>Prefabricated lightweight sections of plastic, metal, or other suitable materials that are interconnected, fixed in place, and placed at ground level to provide a continuous connection between channelizing devices located at intervals along the edge of the sidewalk or walkway.</li>

      <li>Sections of lumber interconnected and fixed in place to form a continuous edge.</li>

      <li>Formed-in-place asphalt or concrete curb.</li>

      <li>Prefabricated concrete curb sections that are interconnected and fixed in place to form a continuous edge.</li>

      <li>Continuous temporary traffic barrier or longitudinal channelizing barricades placed along the edge of the sidewalk or walkway that provides a pedestrian edging at ground level.</li>

      <li>Chain link or other fencing equipped with a continuous bottom rail.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M04_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Detectable pedestrian edging should be orange, white, or yellow and should match the color of the adjacent channelizing devices or traffic control devices, if any are present.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section6M05">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.86</span><span class="text_added">6M.05</span> Crash Cushions</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>506. In Section 6M.05 (existing Section 6F.86) Crash Cushions, FHWA proposes to delete the last existing Guidance paragraph about use of these devices in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications and instead insert this into P5 as part of the Standard statement, to consolidate information about design and use.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">This change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M05_para01">01</span><span class="support">Crash cushions are systems that mitigate the effects of errant vehicles that strike obstacles, either by smoothly decelerating the vehicle to a stop when hit head-on, or by redirecting the errant vehicle. The two types of crash cushions that are used in TTC zones are stationary crash cushions and truck-mounted attenuators. Crash cushions in TTC zones help protect the drivers from the exposed ends of barriers, fixed objects, shadow vehicles, and other obstacles. Specific information on the use of crash cushions can be found in <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">AASHTO’s </span>“Roadside Design Guide<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span>” <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">(see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>)</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">4th Edition, 2011, AASHTO</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M05_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Crash cushions shall be crashworthy<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> (see definition in <a href ="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a>)</span>. They shall also be designed for each application to stop or redirect errant vehicles under prescribed conditions. Crash cushions shall be periodically inspected to verify that they have not been hit or damaged. Damaged crash cushions shall be promptly repaired or replaced to maintain their crashworthiness.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M05_para03">03</span><span class="support">Stationary crash cushions are used in the same manner as permanent highway installations to protect drivers from the exposed ends of barriers, fixed objects, and other obstacles.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M05_para04">04</span><span class="standard">Stationary crash cushions shall be designed for the specific application intended.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6M05_para05">05</span><span class="standard"> Truck-mounted attenuators shall be energy-absorbing devices attached to the rear of shadow trailers or trucks<span class="text_added"> and shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications</span>. If used, the shadow vehicle with the attenuator shall be located in advance of the work area, workers, or equipment to reduce the severity of rear-end crashes from errant vehicles.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M05_para06">06</span><span class="support">Trucks or trailers are often used as shadow vehicles to protect workers or work equipment from errant vehicles. These shadow vehicles are normally equipped with flashing arrows, changeable message signs, and/or high-intensity rotating, flashing, oscillating, or strobe lights <span class="text_added change_from_npa">and are </span>located properly in advance of the workers and/or equipment that they are protecting. However, these shadow vehicles might themselves cause injuries to occupants of the errant vehicles if they are not equipped with truck-mounted attenuators.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M05_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">The shadow truck should be positioned a sufficient distance in advance of the workers or equipment being protected so that there will be sufficient distance, but not so much so that errant vehicles will travel around the shadow truck and strike the protected workers and/or equipment.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M05_para08">08</span><span class="support">Chapter 9 of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">AASHTO’s </span>“Roadside Design Guide<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span>” <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">(see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>)</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">4th Edition, 2011, AASHTO</span> contains additional information regarding the use of shadow vehicles.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">If used, the truck-mounted attenuator should be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications.</span></p></span>

	<h3 id="section6M06">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.87</span><span class="text_added">6M.06</span> Rumble Strips</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M06_para01">01</span><span class="support">Transverse rumble strips consist of intermittent, narrow, transverse areas of rough-textured or slightly raised or depressed road surface that extend across the travel lanes to alert drivers to unusual vehicular traffic conditions. Through noise and vibration they attract the driver’s attention to such features as unexpected changes in alignment and to conditions requiring a stop.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6M06_para02">02</span><span class="support">Longitudinal rumble strips consist of a series of rough-textured or slightly raised or depressed road surfaces located along the shoulder to alert road users that they are leaving the travel lanes.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M06_para03">03</span><span class="standard">If it is desirable to use a color other than the color of the pavement for a longitudinal rumble strip, the color of the rumble strip shall be the same color as the longitudinal line the rumble strip supplements.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6M06_para04">04</span><span class="standard">If the color of a transverse rumble strip used within a travel lane is not the color of the pavement, the color of the rumble strip shall be white, black, or orange.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M06_para05">05</span><span class="option">Intervals between transverse rumble strips may be reduced as the distance to the approached conditions is diminished in order to convey an impression that a closure speed is too fast and/or that an action is imminent. A sign warning drivers of the onset of rumble strips may be placed in advance of any transverse rumble strip installation.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M06_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Transverse rumble strips should be placed transverse to vehicular traffic movement. They should not adversely affect overall pavement skid resistance under wet or dry conditions.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6M06_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">In urban areas, even though a closer spacing might be warranted, transverse rumble strips should be designed in a manner that does not promote unnecessary braking or erratic steering maneuvers by road users.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6M06_para08">08</span><span class="guidance">Transverse rumble strips should not be placed on sharp horizontal or vertical curves.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6M06_para09">09</span><span class="guidance">Rumble strips should not be placed through pedestrian crossings or on bicycle routes.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6M06_para10">10</span><span class="guidance">Transverse rumble strips should not be placed on roadways used by bicyclists unless a minimum clear path of 4 feet is provided at each edge of the roadway or on each paved shoulder<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> as described in AASHTO’s “Guide to the Development of Bicycle Facilities” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>)</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6M06_para11">11</span><span class="guidance">Longitudinal rumble strips should not be placed on the shoulder of a roadway that is used by bicyclists unless a minimum clear path of 4 feet is also provided on the shoulder.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section6M07">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.88</span><span class="text_added">6M.07</span> Screens</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M07_para01">01</span><span class="support">Screens are used to block the road users’ view of activities that can be distracting. Screens might improve safety and motor vehicle traffic flow where volumes approach the roadway capacity because they discourage gawking and reduce headlight glare from oncoming motor vehicle traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M07_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Screens should not be mounted where they could adversely restrict road user visibility and sight distance and adversely affect the <span class="text_deleted">reasonably safe </span>operation of vehicles.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M07_para03">03</span><span class="option">Screens may be mounted on the top of temporary traffic barriers that separate two-way motor vehicle traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M07_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Design of screens should be in accordance with Chapter 9 of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">AASHTO’s </span>“Roadside Design Guide<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span>” <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">(see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>)</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">4th Edition, 2011, AASHTO</span>.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section6M08">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.82</span><span class="text_added">6M.08</span> <span class="text_deleted">Floodlights</span><span class="text_added">Lighting for Night Work</span></h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>508. In Section 6M.08 (existing Section 6F.82) retitled, “Lighting for Night Work,” FHWA proposes to change existing P4 from a Standard to a Guidance statement to reflect the intent to minimize glare caused by floodlighting.</p>

	<p>FHWA proposes to add two new sentences to existing P5 to recommend that lighting should be sufficient so as to identify a worker clearly as a person and care should be taken to minimize the potential for shadows to conceal workers within the work area.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">These changes are adopted as proposed, except with a modification to the first new sentence added to Paragraph 5 based on comment.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M08_para01">01</span><span class="support">Utility, maintenance, or construction activities on highways are frequently conducted during nighttime periods when vehicular traffic volumes are lower. Large construction projects are sometimes operated on a double-shift basis requiring night work (see <a href="part6n.xhtml#section6N18">Section <span class="text_deleted">6G.19</span><span class="text_added">6N.18</span></a>).</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M08_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">When nighttime work is being performed, floodlights should be used to illuminate the work area, equipment crossings, and other areas.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6M08_para03">03</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted">F</span><span class="text_added">When used, f</span>loodlighting <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> <span class="text_deleted">not produce a disabling</span><span class="text_added">be installed in a manner that minimizes</span> glare <span class="text_deleted">condition for</span><span class="text_added">to</span> approaching road users, flaggers, or workers.</span></p>

	<p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6M08_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">The adequacy of the floodlight placement and elimination of potential glare should be determined by driving through and observing the floodlighted area from each direction on all approaching roadways after the initial floodlight setup, at night, and periodically.<span class="text_added"> Lighting should be sufficient so as to <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">clearly</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">give road users the capability to</span> identify a worker as a person. Care should be taken to minimize the potential for shadows to conceal workers within the work area.</span></span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M08_para05">05</span><span class="support">Desired illumination levels vary depending upon the nature of the task involved. An average horizontal luminance of 5 foot candles can be adequate for general activities. Tasks requiring high levels of precision and extreme care can require an average horizontal luminance of 20 foot candles.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6M08_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Except in emergency situations, flagger stations shall be illuminated at night.</span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>