<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 1C - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1><span class="text_added">Chapter 1C. Definitions, Acronymns, and Abbreviations Used in this Manual</span></h1>

    
    <h3 id="section1C01">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.01</span> Definitions of Headings<span class="text_deleted">, Words, and Phrases</span><span class="text_added">Used</span> in this Manual</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>16. In proposed new Chapter 1C Definitions, Acronyms, and Abbreviations Used in this Manual, FHWA proposes to replace existing Section 1A.13 with two new Sections. Section 1C.01, titled, “Definitions of Headings Used in this Manual” would cover definitions of the headings used in the MUTCD (such as Standard, Guidance, etc.). Section 1C.02, titled, “Definitions of Words and Phrases Used in this Manual” would cover definitions of the words and phrases used in the MUTCD. FHWA proposes this revision to provide clarity between definitions of the headings and definitions of words and phrases used throughout the Manual.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The reorganization is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to revise the definition of a Standard in Section 1C.01 to indicate that in limited cases, the results of a documented engineering study might indicate that a deviation from one or more requirements of a Standard provision to be appropriate. FHWA proposes this revision based on <a href="https://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/reqdetails.asp?id=30">Official Ruling No. 1(09)–1(I)</a>.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The revised definition of a Standard is adopted as proposed.  The request to require jurisdictions to inform FHWA of deviations from a Standard under this provision is not adopted, as this would be outside the scope of this rulemaking, however it could be considered for a future edition of the MUTCD.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1C01_para01">01</span><span class="standard">When used in this Manual, the text headings of Standard, Guidance, Option, and Support shall be defined as follows:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Standard—a statement of required, mandatory, or specifically prohibitive practice regarding a traffic control device. <span class="text_added">In limited, location-specific cases, the results of a documented engineering study (see <a href="part1d.xhtml#section1D03">Section 1D.03</a>) might indicate a deviation from one or more requirements of a Standard provision to be appropriate.</span> All Standard statements are labeled, and the text appears in bold type. The verb “shall” is typically used. The verbs “should” and “may” are not used in Standard statements. Standard statements are sometimes modified by Option<span class="text_deleted">s</span><span class="text_added"> statements</span>.</li>

      <li>Guidance—a statement of recommended<span class="text_deleted">, but not mandatory,</span> practice in typical situations, with deviations allowed if engineering judgment or engineering study <span class="text_added">(see <a href="part1d.xhtml#section1D03">Section 1D.03</a>) </span>indicates the deviation to be appropriate. All Guidance statements are labeled, and the text appears in unbold <span class="text_added change_from_npa">italic </span>type. The verb “should” is typically used. The verbs “shall” and “may” are not used in Guidance statements. Guidance statements are sometimes modified by Option<span class="text_deleted">s</span><span class="text_added"> statements</span>.</li>

      <li>Option—a statement of practice that is a permissive condition and carries no requirement or recommendation. Option statements sometime<span class="text_added">s</span> contain allowable modifications to a Standard or Guidance statement. All Option statements are labeled, and the text appears in unbold type. The verb “may” is typically used. The verbs “shall” and “should” are not used in Option statements.</li>

      <li>Support—an informational statement that does not convey any degree of mandate, recommendation, authorization, prohibition, or enforceable condition. Support statements are labeled, and the text appears in unbold type. The verbs “shall,” “should,” and “may” are not used in Support statements.</li>
    </ol>

	<h3 id="section1C02"><span class="text_added">Section 1C.02 Definitions of Words and Phrases Used in this Manual</span></h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>17. In proposed Section 1C.02 Definitions of Words and Phrases Used in this Manual, FHWA proposes to 
<i>revise</i> the existing definitions for the following: “active grade crossing warning system,” “actuated operation,” “actuation,” “channelizing line markings,” “constant warning time train detection,” “conventional road,” “crashworthy,” “delineator,” “emergency-vehicle traffic control signal,” “engineering judgement,” “engineering study,” “flashing,” “full-actuated operation,” “highway traffic signal,” “in-roadway lights,” “intersection,” “logo,” “median,” “minimum track clearance distance,” “overhead sign,” “parking area,” “paved,” “pedestrian clearance time,” “pedestrian facility,” “pictograph,” “preemption,” “pre-signal,” “private road open to public travel,” “queue clearance time,” “quiet zone,” “raised pavement marker,” “road user,” “semi-actuated operation,” “sign,” “sign panel,” “sequence of indications,” “statutory speed limit,” “traffic,” “traffic control device,” “traffic control signal (traffic signal),” and “worker.” FHWA proposes these revisions to reflect accepted practice and terminologies, and for consistency in the usage of these terms in the MUTCD. The proposed revision to the definition of “engineering study” is a specific recommendation of Item 531 of the <a href="http://ncutcd.org/wp-content/uploads/MUTCD/MUTCD-20-Year-Vision-NCUTCD-Appvd-1-9-14-FINAL.pdf">20-Year Vision and Strategic Plan for the MUTCD</a>.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The revised definitions are adopted as proposed, except as follows: for “constant warning time train detection”, the word “train is deleted from the term and “trains” is revised to “rail traffic” so as to include light rail transit vehicles; for “crashworthy” only the first sentence is adopted and the remainder of the definition is relocated to new Section 1D.11 as it is mostly Support material; for “engineering judgment” text is added to clarify that the safety and operational efficiency for all road users is to be included in evaluations; for “pedestrian clearance time” the definition is adopted with revisions to replace the first occurrence of “traveled way” with “pavement”, for clarity and accuracy; for “pictograph”, based on comments, the definition is adopted with revisions to add other types of institutions that can be identified with a pictograph; “private road open to public travel” is not adopted because it is replaced with the new definition for “site roadways open to public travel” to match the term used throughout the MUTCD; and for “traffic control device” only the first sentence is adopted and the remainder of the definition is relocated to Section 1A.02 as it is more appropriately located there. In addition, a number of other definitions are revised for clarity, completeness, and accuracy.   In addition, several existing and revised definitions are relocated editorially, with some revisions, to be “nested” under an item that is broadly defined, so that the interrelationships between the broad term and the definitions of the various types of that broad term can be more readily identified by readers.  The broad terms under which other more specific terms’ definitions are nested include “beacon’, “bicycle lane”, “highway traffic signal”, “hybrid beacon”, and “toll collection”.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to <i>add</i> definitions for the following: “active grade crossing,” “agency,” “application,” “bicycle signal face,” “bicycle symbol signal indication,” “blank-out sign,” “busway,” “diagnostic team,” “driveway,” “driving aisle,” “dynamic message sign,” “engineer,” “exclusive alignment,” “fail-safe,” “four-quadrant gate system,” “general-purpose lane,” “gore area,” “identification marker,” “jughandle turn,” “loading zone,” “low-volume rural road,” “mixed-use alignment,” “on-street parking,” “option lane,” “parking space,” “professional engineer (P.E.),” “queue cutter signal,” “reconstructed,” “rectangular rapid-flashing beacon,” “right-of-way, public highway,” “semi-exclusive alignment,” “serviceable,” “shoulder,” “sidewalk grade crossing,” “signal dimming,” “site roadways open to public travel,” “swing gate,” “through train,” “toll road (facility),” “uncontrolled approach,” and “variable message sign.” FHWA proposes these revisions because these terms either are used or are proposed for use in the MUTCD.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">The added definitions are adopted as proposed, except  as  follows:  for “general  purpose  lane,” managed lane is added as another type of lane that is excluded from this term and other minor revisions are made to match usage of the term in the MUTCD text; for “option lane,” the definition is adopted with revisions to more accurately describe this type of lane; “reconstructed” and “right-of-way, public highway” are not adopted; and for “shoulder,” based on comments a fourth sentence is added to indicate a shoulder might also be used for pedestrian and/or bicycle travel.  Some of the other added definitions are adopted with revisions for clarity, accuracy, completeness, and to match usage of the term in the MUTCD.   Also, several additional new definitions are added based on comments, because the terms are frequently used in the MUTCD or within other definitions, and these new definitions reflect their meanings based on how the terms are used.  The newly added definitions include “electronic tolling” and “manual toll collection” (nested under “toll collection”); “automated vehicle”; “bicycle box,” “counter-flow bicycle lane,” “separated bicycle lane,” and “buffer-separated bicycle lane” (nested under “bicycle lane”); “business identification sign panel,” “dedicated lane”; “detection plate”; “driving automation system”; “lane reduction”; “scanning graphic”; and “two-stage bicycle turn box.”</p>

	<p>In addition, FHWA proposes to <i>delete</i> the existing definitions for the following: “advance preemption,” “advance preemption time,” “average day,” “cantilevered signal structure,” “concurrent flow preferential lane,” “end of roadway marker,” “interval sequence,” “maximum highway traffic signal preemption time,” “minimum warning time,” “right-of-way transfer time,” “simultaneous preemption,” and “wayside equipment.” FHWA proposes these revisions because these terms are either proposed for deletion from the Manual as part of this document or used only once in a specific section of the Manual.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">The deletions are adopted as proposed, except based on comments the following definitions are retained because they are used in more than one section of the MUTCD: “advance preemption,” “advance preemption time,” “average day,” “cantilevered signal structure,” “maximum highway traffic signal preemption time,” “separation time,” and “simultaneous preemption.”  Also, the following additional definitions are deleted because they conflict with other definitions, usage within the manual, or are no longer needed: “altered speed zone,” “reconstructed,” “right-of-way [assignment],” “right-of-way, public highway,” and “speed measurement markings.”</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to delete the definition for “safe-positioned” and relocate this information to Part 6. FHWA proposes this revision because this term is only used in that Part of the MUTCD.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">The relocation to Part 6 is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to delete the definitions for “average day,” “cantilevered signal structure,” “concurrent flow preferential lane,” and “end-of-roadway marker.” FHWA proposes these revisions because these terms are not used anywhere in the MUTCD.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">As noted above, “average day” and “cantilevered signal structure” are retained, and “concurrent flow preferential lane” and “end-of-roadway marker” are deleted as proposed.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">Further, a new Standard is added as P2 of the section to clarify that definitions in this section or elsewhere in this manual shall govern in cases where such terms have a different definition in another resource or in common use.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label"><span class="text_added">Standard:</span></span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1C02_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">Unless otherwise defined in this Section, or in other Parts of this Manual, words or phrases shall have the meaning(s) as defined in the <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">most recent editions of </span>the “Uniform Vehicle Code,” “AASHTO Transportation Glossary (Highway Definitions),” <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">and</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">or</span> other <span class="text_added change_from_npa">appropriate </span>publications <span class="text_deleted">mentioned</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">referenced</span>in Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.11</span><span class="text_added">1A.05</span></span>.</span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1C02_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Where a term that is defined in this Section or elsewhere in this Manual has a different definition in another resource or in common use, the definition herein shall govern for the purposes of the applicability of the provisions of this Manual.</span></p>
	</span>
	</div>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1C02_para03">03</span><span class="standard">The following words and phrases, when used in this Manual, shall have the following meanings:</span></p>

    <ol class="standard">
      <li>Accessible Pedestrian Signal—a device that communicates information about pedestrian signal timing in <span class="text_added change_from_npa">a </span>non-visual format such as audible tones<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> and/or</span> speech messages, and<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">/or</span> vibrating surfaces.</li>

      <li>Accessible Pedestrian Signal Detector—a device designated to assist the pedestrian who has <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vision</span> or physical disabilities in activating the pedestrian phase.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Active Grade Crossing—a grade crossing equipped with automatic traffic control devices, such as flashing-light signals, gates, and/or traffic control signals, that are activated upon the detection of approaching rail traffic.</li></span>

      <li>Actuated<span class="text_deleted"> Operation</span>—a type of traffic control signal operation in which some or all signal phases are operated on the basis of actuation.</li>

      <li>Actuation—initiation of<span class="text_added">,</span> a change in<span class="text_added">,</span> or <span class="text_added">an </span>extension of a traffic signal phase <span class="text_added">or a sign legend </span>through the operation of any type of detector.</li>

      <div class="change_from_npa"><li>Advance Preemption—the notification of approaching rail traffic that is forwarded to the highway traffic signal controller unit or assembly by the railroad or light rail transit equipment in advance of the activation of the railroad or light rail transit warning devices.</li>

      <li>Advance Preemption Time—the period of time that is the difference between the required maximum highway traffic signal preemption time and the activation of the railroad or light rail transit warning devices.</li>
</div>

      <li>Advisory Speed—a recommended speed for all vehicles operating on a section of highway and based on the highway design, operating characteristics, and conditions.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Agency—an organization with the responsibility for providing, maintaining, and/or operating a public or private road system.</li></span>

      <li>Alley—a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in urban areas and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.</li>

      <div class="change_from_npa">
		<span class="text_deleted">Altered Speed Zone—a speed limit, other than a statutory speed limit, that is based upon an engineering study.</span>

		<li><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Annual </span>Average <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Annual </span>Daily Traffic (AADT)—the total volume of traffic passing a point or segment of a highway facility in both directions for one year divided by the number of days in the year. Normally, periodic daily traffic volumes are adjusted for hours of the day counted, days of the week, and seasons of the year to arrive at <span class="text_added change_from_npa">annual </span>average <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">annual </span>daily traffic.</li>
	</div>
		<span class="text_added"><li>Application—in regard to a traffic control device, the act of deciding to use a device, generally or at a particular location for a particular condition.</li></span>

      <li>Approach—all lanes of traffic moving toward an intersection or a midblock location from one direction, including any adjacent parking lane(s).</li>

      <li>Arterial Highway (Street)—a general term denoting a highway primarily used by through traffic, usually on a continuous route or a highway designated as part of an arterial system.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<span class="text_added"><li>Automated Vehicle—see Driving Automation System.</li></span>
	</div>

      <li>Automatic Lane—see Exact Change Lane<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> within the definition of Toll Collection</span>.</li>

      <li>Average Daily Traffic (ADT)—the average 24 hour volume, being the total volume during a stated period divided by the number of days in that period. Normally, this would be periodic daily traffic volumes over several days, not adjusted for days of the week or seasons of the year.</li>

      <div class="change_from_npa"><li>Average Day—a day representing traffic volumes normally and repeatedly found at a location, typically a weekday when volumes are influenced by employment or a weekend day when volumes are influenced by entertainment or recreation.</li>
</div>

      <li>Backplate—see Signal Backplate.</li>

      <li>Barrier-Separated Lane—a preferential lane or other special purpose lane that is separated from the adjacent general-purpose lane(s) by a physical barrier.</li>

      <li>Beacon—a highway traffic signal with one or more signal <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">sections</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"></span> that operates in a flashing mode.<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> Types of beacons include:</span>
		<ol type="a">
			<span class="text_added"><li class="change_from_npa">Emergency-Vehicle Hybrid Beacon—a special type of beacon (see Hybrid Beacon).</li></span>
			<li>Intersection Control Beacon—a beacon used only at an intersection to control two or more directions of travel.</li>
			<span class="text_added"><li class="change_from_npa">Pedestrian Hybrid Beacon—a special type of beacon (see Hybrid Beacon).</li></span>
			<span class="text_added"><li>Rectangular Rapid-Flashing Beacon<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> (RRFB)</span>—a pedestrian-activated <span class="text_added change_from_npa">and/or bicycle-activated </span>device comprising two horizontally arranged, rapidly flashed, rectangular-shaped yellow indications that is used to provide supplemental emphasis for a pedestrian, school, or trail crossing warning sign at a marked crosswalk across an uncontrolled approach.</li></span>
			<li>Speed Limit Sign Beacon—a beacon used <span class="text_added change_from_npa">only </span>to supplement a SPEED LIMIT sign.</li>
			<li>Stop Beacon—a beacon used <span class="text_added change_from_npa">only </span>to supplement a STOP sign, a DO NOT ENTER sign, or a WRONG WAY sign.</li>
			<li>Warning Beacon—a beacon used only to supplement an appropriate warning or regulatory sign or marker.</li>
		</ol>

	</li>

      <li>Bicycle—a pedal-powered vehicle upon which the human operator sits.</li>
	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>Bicycle Box—a designated area on the approach to a signalized intersection, between an advance motorist stop line and the crosswalk or intersection, intended to provide bicyclists a visible place to wait in front of stopped motorists during the red signal phase.</li>
	</span></div>
      <li>Bicycle Facilities—a general term denoting improvements and provisions that accommodate or encourage bicycling, including parking and storage facilities, and shared roadways not specifically defined for bicycle use.</li>

      <li>Bicycle Lane—a portion of a roadway that has been designated for preferential or exclusive use by bicyclists<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> by pavement</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">. A typical bicycle lane is delinated from the adjacent general-purpose lane(s) by longitudinal pavement markings and bicycle lane symbol or word</span> markings and, if used, signs.<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> Other types of bicycle lanes include:</span>
<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<ol type="a">
			<li>Buffer-Separated Bicycle Lane—a bicycle lane that is separated from the adjacent general-purpose lane(s) by a pattern of standard longitudinal pavement markings that is wider than a normal or wide lane line marking.</li>
			<li>Counter-Flow Bicycle Lane—a one-directional bicycle lane that provides a lawful path of travel for bicycles in the opposite direction from general traffic on a roadway that allow general traffic to travel in only one direction. Counter-flow bicycle lanes are designated by the traffic control devices used for other bicycle lanes.</li>
			<li>Separated Bicycle Lane—an exclusive facility for bicyclists that is located within or directly adjacent to the roadway and that is physically separated from motor vehicle traffic with a vertical element. Separated bicycle lanes are differentiated from other bicycle lanes by a vertical element.</li>
		</ol>
	</span></div>
	</li>
		<span class="text_added"><li>Bicycle Signal Face—a signal face that displays only bicycle symbol indications, that exclusively controls a bicycle movement from a designated bicycle lane or from a separate facility such as a shared use path, and that displays signal indications that are applicable only to the bicycle movement.</li></span>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Bicycle Symbol Signal Indication—a red, yellow, or green signal indication that displays a bicycle symbol rather than a circular or arrow indication.</li></span>

      <li>Bikeway—a generic term for any road, street, path, or way that in some manner is specifically designated for bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or are to be shared with other transportation modes.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Blank-Out Sign—a sign that displays a single predetermined message only when activated. When not activated, the sign legend is not visible.</li></span>

      <li>Buffer-Separated Lane—a preferential lane or other special purpose lane that is separated from the adjacent general-purpose lane(s) by a pattern of standard longitudinal pavement markings that is wider than a normal or wide lane line marking. The buffer area might include rumble strips, textured pavement, or channelizing devices such as tubular markers or traversable curbs, but does not include a physical barrier.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
		<span class="text_added"><li>Business Identification Sign Panel—a panel containing a word legend or logo used to identify a business on a Specific Service sign.</li></span>
	</div>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Busway—<span class="text_added change_from_npa">a </span>traveled way that is used exclusively by buses.</li></span>

      <div class="change_from_npa"><li>Cantilevered Signal Structure—a structure, also referred to as a mast arm, that is rigidly attached to a vertical pole and is used to provide overhead support of highway traffic signal faces or grade crossing signal units.</li>
</div>

      <li>Center Line Markings—the yellow pavement marking line(s) that delineates the separation of traffic lanes that have opposite directions of travel on a roadway. These markings need not be at the geometrical center of the pavement.</li>

      <li>Changeable Message Sign—a sign that is capable of displaying more than one message (one of which might be a “blank” display), changeable manually, by remote control, or by automatic control. Electronic-display changeable message signs are referred to as Dynamic Message Signs in the National Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) Architecture and are referred to as Variable Message Signs in the National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) standards publication.</li>

      <li>Channelizing Line<span class="text_deleted"> Markings</span>—a wide or double solid white line <span class="text_added">marking </span>used to form islands where traffic in the same direction of travel is permitted on both sides of the island.</li>

      <li>Circular Intersection—an intersection that has an island, generally circular in design, located in the center of the intersection where traffic passes to the right of the island. Circular intersections include roundabouts, rotaries, and traffic circles.</li>

      <li>Circulatory Roadway—the roadway within a circular intersection on which traffic travels in a counterclockwise direction around an island in the center of the circular intersection.</li>

      <li>Clear Storage Distance—when used in <a href="part8_toc.html">Part 8</a>, the distance available for vehicle storage measured between 6 feet from the rail nearest the intersection to the intersection stop line or the normal stopping point on the highway. At skewed grade crossings and intersections, the 6-foot distance shall be measured perpendicular to the nearest rail either along the center line or edge line of the highway, as appropriate, to obtain the shorter distance. Where exit gates are used, the distance available for vehicle storage is measured from the point where the rear of the vehicle would be clear of the exit gate arm. In cases where the exit gate arm is parallel to the track(s) and is not perpendicular to the highway, the distance is measured either along the center line or edge line of the highway, as appropriate, to obtain the shorter distance.</li>

      <li>Clear Zone—the total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the traveled way, that is available for an errant driver to stop or regain control of a vehicle. This area might consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, and/or a non-recoverable, traversable slope with a clear run-out area at its toe.</li>

      <li>Collector Highway—a term denoting a highway that in rural areas connects small towns and local highways to arterial highways, and in urban areas provides land access and traffic circulation within residential, commercial, and business areas and connects local highways to the arterial highways.</li>

      <div class="text_deleted">Concurrent Flow Preferential Lane—a preferential lane that is operated in the same direction as the adjacent mixed flow lanes, separated from the adjacent general-purpose freeway lanes by a standard lane stripe, painted buffer, or barrier.</div>

      <li>Conflict Monitor—a device used to detect and respond to improper or conflicting signal indications and improper operating voltages in a traffic controller assembly.</li>

      <li>Constant Warning Time <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">Train </span></span>Detection—a means of detecting rail traffic that provides relatively uniform warning time for the approach of <span class="text_added">through </span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">trains</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">rail traffic</span> <span class="text_deleted">or light rail transit traffic </span>that <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">are</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">is</span> not accelerating or decelerating after being detected.</li>

      <li>Contiguous Lane—a lane, preferential or otherwise, that is separated from the adjacent lane(s) only by a normal or wide lane line marking.</li>

      <li>Controller Assembly—a complete electrical device mounted in a cabinet for controlling the operation of a highway traffic signal.</li>

      <li>Controller Unit—that part of a controller assembly that is devoted to the selection and timing of the display of signal indications.</li>

      <li>Conventional Road—a street or highway other than a<span class="text_added">n</span> <span class="text_deleted">low-volume road (as defined in <a href="part5a.xhtml#section5A01">Section 5A.01</a>),</span> expressway<span class="text_deleted">,</span> or freeway.</li>

      <li>Counter-Flow Lane—a lane operating in a direction opposite to the normal flow of traffic designated for peak direction of travel during at least a portion of the day. Counter-flow lanes are usually separated from the off-peak direction lanes by tubular markers or other flexible channelizing devices, temporary lane separators, or movable or permanent barrier.</li>

      <li>Crashworthy—<span class="text_deleted">a characteristic</span><span class="text_added">the ability</span> of a roadside <span class="text_added">safety hardware device or </span>appurtenance <span class="text_added change_from_npa">to minimize risks to vehicle occupants by allowing a vehicle impacting the appurtenance to be slowed before stopping, redirected, or to continue without significant resistance. <a href="part1d.xhtml#section1D11">Section 1D.11</a> contains additional information about crashworthiness.</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">that <span class="text_deleted">has been successfully crash tested in accordance with a national standard such as the National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report 350, “Recommended Procedures for the Safety Performance Evaluation of Highway Features.”</span><span class="text_added">is intended to minimize risks to design vehicle occupants by allowing a vehicle impacting the appurtenance to be slowed, slowed before stopping, redirected, or to continue without significant resistance. Acceptable performance of a crashworthy device is determined by a nationally established standard. Roadside appurtenances include permanent and portable sign supports, other permanent or temporary traffic control devices, and other roadside fixtures that are not traffic control devices, such as longitudinal barriers, bridge railings, barricades, crash cushions, within the clear zone. Information on the FHWA's policy on crashworthiness of devices on the National Highway System and other roadways is available at the FHWA Office of Safety Web site at <a href="https://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/roadway_dept/countermeasures/reduce_crash_severity/policy_memo_guidance.cfm">https://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/roadway_dept/countermeasures/reduce_crash_severity/policy_memo_guidance.cfm.</a></span></span></li>

      <li>Crosswalk—(a) that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of the roadway, the part of a roadway included within the extension of the lateral lines of the sidewalk at right angles to the center line; (b) any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated as a pedestrian crossing by pavement marking lines on the surface, which might be supplemented by contrasting pavement texture, style, or color.</li>

      <li>Crosswalk Lines—white pavement marking lines that identify a crosswalk.</li>

      <li>Cycle Length—the time required for one complete sequence of signal indications.</li>

      <li>Dark Mode—the lack of all signal indications at a signalized location. (The dark mode is most commonly associated with power failures, ramp meters, hybrid beacons, beacons, and some movable bridge signals.)</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
		<span class="text_added"><li>Dedicated Lane—A lane on a freeway or expressway that provides access to: (a) either an exit lane or the mainline, but not both, at a freeway or expressway exit, or (b) only one roadway at a freeway or expressway split.</li></span>
	</div>

      <li>Delineator—a retroreflective device mounted <span class="text_deleted">on the roadway surface or </span>at the side of the roadway in a series to indicate the alignment of the roadway, especially at night or in adverse weather.</li>

      <li>Design Vehicle—the longest vehicle permitted by statute of the road authority (State or other) on that roadway.</li>

      <li>Designated Bicycle Route—a system of bikeways designated by the jurisdiction having authority with appropriate directional and informational route signs, with or without specific bicycle route numbers.</li>

      <li>Detectable—having a continuous edge within 6 inches of the surface so that pedestrians <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">who have visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">with vision</span> disabilities can sense its presence and receive usable guidance information.</li>

      <li>Detector—a device used for determining the presence or passage of <span class="text_added change_from_npa">motor </span>vehicles<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, bicycles,</span> or pedestrians.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
		<span class="text_added"><li>Detection Plate—a smooth continuous plate used on a pedestrian channelizing devices to facilitate the use of low-vision canes for pedestrians with vision disabilities. The bottom edge of the detection plate shall be no more than 2 inches above the walkway and the top edge of the detection plate shall be at least 8 inches above the walkway. The detection plate shall share the same vertical plane as the hand trailing edge of the pedestrian channelizing device.</li></span>
	</div>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Diagnostic Team—a group of knowledgeable representatives of the parties of interest in a grade crossing or group of grade crossings (see 23 CFR <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Section 109, </span>Part 646.204).</li></span>

      <li>Downstream—a term that refers to a location that is encountered by traffic subsequent to an upstream location as it flows in an “upstream to downstream” direction. For example, “the downstream end of a lane line separating the turn lane from a through lane on the approach to an intersection” is the end of the lane line that is closest to the intersection.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Driveway—an access from a roadway to a building, site, or abutting property.</li></span>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Driving Aisle—circulation area for motor vehicles within a parking area, typically between rows of parking spaces. Driving aisle provide <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">a </span>one-way or two-way travel. Driving aisles are exempted from compliance with MUTCD provisions.</li></span>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
		<span class="text_added"><li>Driving Automation System—technology that automated some or all aspects of the driving task to assist or replace the human vehicle operator. <a href="part5a.xhtml#section5A03">Section 5A.03</a> contains descriptions of the automation levels.</li></span>
	</div>

      <li>Dropped Lane—<span class="text_added change_from_npa">see Lane Drop.</span></li>

      <li>Dual-Arrow Signal Section—a type of signal section designed to include both a yellow arrow and a green arrow.</li>

      <li>Dynamic Envelope—the clearance required for light rail transit traffic or a train and its cargo overhang due to any combination of loading, lateral motion, or suspension failure (see <a href="part8c.xhtml#figure8C03">Figure <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">8B-8</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">8C-3</span></a>).</li>

      <li>Dynamic Exit Gate Operating Mode—a mode of operation where the exit gate operation is based on the presence of vehicles within the minimum track clearance distance.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Dynamic Message Sign—see Changeable Message Sign.</li></span>

      <li>Edge Line Markings—white or yellow pavement marking lines that delineate the right or left edge(s) of a traveled way.</li>

      <li>Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) Account Only Lane—a non-attended toll lane that is restricted to use only by vehicles with a registered toll payment account.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<span class="text_added">
		<li>Emergency-Vehicle Hybrid Beacon—see Hybrid Beacon.</li>
		<li>Emergency-Vehicle Traffic Control Signal—see Highway Traffic Signal.</li>
	</span>
	</div>

      <div class="text_deleted">End-of-Roadway Marker—a device used to warn and alert road users of the end of a roadway in other than temporary traffic control zones.</div>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Engineer—see Professional Engineer.</li></span>

      <li>Engineering Judgment—the evaluation of available pertinent information<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> including, but not limited to, the safety and operational efficiency of all road users</span>, and the application of appropriate principles, provisions, and practices as contained in this Manual and other sources, for the purpose of deciding upon the <span class="text_added"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">appearance</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">design (see <a href="part1d.xhtml#section1D03">Section 1D.03</a>)</span>, use, installation, or</span><span class="text_deleted">applicability, design,</span> operation<span class="text_deleted">, or installation</span> of a traffic control device. Engineering judgment shall be exercised by <span class="text_deleted">an</span><span class="text_added">a professional</span> engineer<span class="text_added"> (see <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Definition 169</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">definition in this Section</span>) with appropriate traffic engineering expertise</span>, or by an individual working under the supervision of <span class="text_added">such </span>an engineer, through the application of procedures and criteria established by the engineer. Documentation of engineering judgment is not required.</li>

      <li>Engineering Study—the <span class="text_deleted">comprehensive </span>analysis and evaluation of available pertinent information<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> including, but not limited to, the safety and operational efficiency of all road users</span>, and the application of appropriate principles, provisions, and practices as contained in this Manual and other sources, for the purpose of deciding upon the <span class="text_added"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">appearance</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">design (see <a href="part1d.xhtml#section1D03">Section 1D.03</a>)</span>, use, installation, or</span><span class="text_deleted">applicability, design,</span> operation<span class="text_deleted">, or installation</span> of a traffic control device. An engineering study shall be performed by <span class="text_deleted">an</span><span class="text_added">a professional</span> engineer<span class="text_added"> (see <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Definition 169</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">definition in this Section</span>) with appropriate traffic engineering expertise</span>, or by an individual working under the supervision of <span class="text_added">such </span>an engineer, through the application of procedures and criteria established by the engineer. An engineering study shall be documented<span class="text_added"> in writing</span>.</li>

      <li>Entrance Gate—an automatic gate that can be lowered across the lanes approaching a grade crossing to block road users from entering the grade crossing.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Exclusive Alignment—a light rail transit track(s) or a bus rapid transit busway that is grade-separated or protected by a fence or traffic barrier. No grade crossings exist along the track(s) or busway. Motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians are prohibited within the right-of-way. Subways and elevated structures are included within this definition.</li></span>

      <li>Exit Gate—an automatic gate that can be lowered across the lanes departing a grade crossing to block road users from entering the grade crossing by driving in the opposing traffic lanes.</li>

      <li>Exit Gate Clearance Time—for Four-Quadrant Gate systems at grade crossings, the amount of time provided to delay the descent of the exit gate arm(s) after entrance gate arm(s) begin to descend.</li>

      <li>Exit Gate Operating Mode—for Four-Quadrant Gate systems at grade crossings, the mode of control used to govern the operation of the exit gate arms.</li>

      <li>Expressway—a divided highway with partial control of access.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Fail-Safe—when used in Part 8, a railroad signal design philosophy applied to a system or device such that the result of a hardware failure or the effect of a software error shall either prohibit the system or device from assuming or maintaining an unsafe state or shall cause the system or device to assume a state that is known to be safe.</li></span>

      <li>Flagger—a person who actively controls the flow of vehicular traffic into and/or through a temporary traffic control zone using hand-signaling devices or an Automated Flagger Assistance Device (AFAD).</li>

      <li>Flasher—a device used to turn highway traffic signal indications on and off at a repetitive rate of approximately once per second.</li>

      <li>Flashing—an operation in which a light source, such as a traffic signal indication<span class="text_added"> or LEDs in a sign</span>, is turned on and off repetitively.</li>

      <li>Flashing-Light Signals—a warning device consisting of two red signal indications arranged horizontally that are activated to flash alternately when rail traffic is approaching or present at a grade crossing.</li>

      <li>Flashing Mode—a mode of operation in which at least one traffic signal indication in each vehicular signal face of a highway traffic signal is turned on and off repetitively.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Four-Quadrant Gate System—an exit gate system that includes entrance and exit gates that control and block road users on all lanes entering and exiting the grade crossing.</li></span>

      <li>Freeway—a divided highway with full control of access.</li>

      <li>Full-Actuated<span class="text_deleted"> Operation</span>—a type of traffic control signal operation in which all signal phases function on the basis of actuation.</li>

      <li>Gate—an automatically-operated or manually-operated traffic control device that is used to physically obstruct road users such that they are discouraged from proceeding past a particular point on a roadway or pathway, or such that they are discouraged from entering a particular grade crossing, ramp, lane, roadway, or facility.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>General-Purpose Lane—a highway lane or set of lanes, other than a <span class="text_added change_from_npa">Managed Lane (see definition in this Section) or a P</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">p</span>referential <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">l</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">L</span>ane (see <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Definition No. 169</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">definition in this Section</span>), <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">on which</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">that</span> all or most traffic that is allowed on that highway is also allowed use. Certain classes of vehicles, such as commercial vehicles or vehicles exceeding a certain weight<span class="text_added change_from_npa">or size</span>, might be prohibited from using one or more of the general-purpose lanes. A general-purpose lane might also be restricted to certain uses, such as passing or turning<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> or as an auxiliary lane</span>.</li></span>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Gore Area—see Physical Gore<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> and</span> Theoretical Gore.</li></span>

      <li>Grade Crossing—the general area where a highway and a railroad and/or light rail transit route cross at the same level, within which are included the tracks, highway, and traffic control devices for traffic traversing that area.</li>

		<li><span class="text_deleted">Active </span>Grade Crossing Warning System—the flashing-light signals, with or without <span class="text_deleted">warning</span><span class="text_added">automatic</span> gates, together with the necessary control equipment used to inform road users of the approach or presence of rail traffic at <span class="text_added change_from_npa">a </span>grade crossing<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span>.</li>
		
      <li>Guide Sign—a sign that shows route designations, <span class="text_added">highway names, </span>destinations, directions, distances, services, points of interest, or other geographical, recreational, or cultural information.</li>

      <li>High-Occupancy Vehicle (HOV)—a motor vehicle carrying at least two <span class="text_added change_from_npa">(</span>or more <span class="text_added change_from_npa">two if the signs for a specific roadway indicate a higher minimum occupancy requirement) </span>persons, including carpools, vanpools, and buses.</li>

      <li>Highway—a general term for denoting a public way for purposes of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">vehicular </span>travel<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> by vehicles and vulnerable road users</span>, including the entire area within the right-of-way.</li>

      <li>Highway-Light Rail Transit Grade Crossing—the general area where a highway and a light rail transit route cross at the same level, within which are included the light rail transit tracks, highway, and traffic control devices for traffic traversing that area.</li>

      <li>Highway-Rail Grade Crossing—the general area where a highway and a railroad cross at the same level, within which are included the railroad tracks, highway, and traffic control devices for highway traffic traversing that area.</li>

      <li>Highway Traffic Signal—a power-operated traffic control device by which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. These devices do not include power-operated signs<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> (except as provided in Chapters <a href="part4s.xhtml">4S</a> and <a href="part4t.xhtml">4T</a>)</span>, steadily-illuminated <span class="text_added change_from_npa">raised </span>pavement markers, <span class="text_added">gates, flashing light signals (see <a href="part8D.xhtml#section8D02">Section 8D.02</a>), </span>warning lights (see <a href="part6f.xhtml#section6L07">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.83</span><span class="text_added">6L.07</span></a>), or steady<span class="text_deleted"> </span><span class="text_added">-</span>burning electric lamps.<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> Highway traffic signal include:</span>
		<ol type="a">
			<span class="text_added"><li>Flashing Beacon—see Beacon.</li></span>
			<li>In-Roadway <span class="text_added change_from_npa">Warning </span>Lights—a special type of highway traffic signal installed in the roadway surface to warn road users that they are approaching a condition on or adjacent to the roadway that might not be readily apparent and might require the road users to <span class="text_deleted">slow down</span><span class="text_added">reduce speed</span> and/or come to a stop.</li>
			<li>Lane-Use Control Signal—a signal face <span class="text_added change_from_npa">or a comparable display on a full-matrix Changeable Message Sign (see <a href="part2l.xhtml">Chapters 2L</a> and <a href="part4t.xhtml">4T</a>) </span>displaying indications to permit or prohibit the use of specific lanes of a roadway <span class="text_added change_from_npa">or a shoulder where driving is sometimes permitted, </span>or to indicate the impending prohibition of such use.</li>
			<li>Traffic Control Signal (Traffic Signal)—a<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">ny</span> highway traffic signal <span class="text_added change_from_npa">placed at intersections, moveable bridges, fire stations, midblock crosswalks, alternating one-way sections of a single lane road, private driveways, or other locations that require conflicting traffic to be</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">by which traffic is alternately</span> directed to stop and permitted to proceed<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> in an orderly manner</span>.<span class="text_added"> These devices do not include pedestrian hybrid beacons (see <a href="part4j.xhtml">Chapter 4J</a>) or emergency-vehicle hybrid beacons (see <a href="part4n.xhtml">Chapter 4N</a>).</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> Traffic control signals include vehicular signal indications, pedestrian signal indications, and bicycle symbol signal indications. Special traffic control signals include:</span>
			<ol type="1">
				<li>Emergency-Vehicle Traffic Control Signal—a <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">special </span>traffic control signal that <span class="text_deleted">assigns the right-of-way to</span><span class="text_added">directs all conflicting traffic to stop in order to permit the driver of</span> an authorized emergency vehicle<span class="text_added"> to proceed into the roadway or intersection</span>.</li>
				<li>Movable Bridge <span class="text_added change_from_npa">Traffic Control </span>Signal—a <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">highway </span>traffic <span class="text_added change_from_npa">control </span>signal installed at a movable bridge to notify traffic to stop during periods when the roadway is closed to allow the bridge to open.</li>
				<li>Portable Traffic Control Signal—a temporary <span class="text_added change_from_npa">component of a </span>traffic control signal <span class="text_added change_from_npa">on a mobile support with one or more signal faces </span>that is designed so that it can be easily transported<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, deployed, or relocated as part of a temporary traffic control signal, or during construction</span> and <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">reused at different locations</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">maintenance as a temporary part of a permanent traffic control signal installation</span>.</li>
				<li>Pre-signal—traffic control signal faces that <span class="text_added">are located upstream from a signalized intersection</span><span class="text_deleted">control traffic approaching a grade crossing</span> <span class="text_added">and are operated </span>in conjunction with the traffic control signal faces <span class="text_deleted">that control traffic approaching a highway-highway intersection beyond the tracks</span><span class="text_added">at the downstream signalized intersection in a manner that is designed to keep the area between the stop line for the upstream traffic control signal faces and the stop line for the downstream signalized intersection clear of queued vehicles</span>. <span class="text_added change_from_npa">When used in conjunction with a grade crossing, the pre-signal is operated for the purpose of preventing vehicles from queuing within the minimum track clearance distance. </span>Supplemental near-side traffic control signal faces for the <span class="text_deleted">highway-highway</span><span class="text_added">downstream signalized</span> intersection are not considered <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">to be </span></span>pre-signals.<span class="text_deleted"> Pre-signals are typically used where the clear storage distance is insufficient to store one or more design vehicles.</span></li>
				<span class="text_added"><li>Queue Cutter Signal—an independently-controlled traffic control signal (not operated in conjunction with the traffic control signal faces at a downstream signalized intersection) located at a grade crossing that controls traffic in one direction only on the roadway for the purpose of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">minimizing vehicular queuing across the tracks</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">keeping the minimum track clearance distance clear of vehicles</span>. The display of red signal indications is activated from a downstream queue detection system, by time of day, by approaching rail traffic, by an approaching bus on a busway, or by a combination of any of these methods.</li></span>
				<li>Ramp Control Signal—a <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">highway </span>traffic <span class="text_added change_from_npa">control </span>signal installed to control the <span class="text_added change_from_npa">merging </span>flow of traffic onto a freeway at an entrance ramp or at a freeway-to-freeway ramp connection.</li>
				<li>Temporary Traffic Control Signal—a traffic control signal that is installed for a limited time period<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> using fixed or portable traffic control signal units</span>.</li>
			</ol>
			</li>
		</ol>
	</li>

      <li>HOV Lane—any preferential lane designated for exclusive use by high-occupancy vehicles for all or part of a day—including a designated lane on a freeway, other highway, street, or independent roadway on a separate right-of-way.</li>

      <li>Hybrid Beacon—a special type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark mode (no indications displayed) between periods of operation and, when operated, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal indications.<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> Hybrid beacons include:</span>
	<ol type="a">
		<li>Emergency-Vehicle Hybrid Beacon—<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">a special type of hybrid beacon </span>used to warn and control traffic at an unsignalized location to assist authorized emergency vehicles in entering or crossing a street or highway.</li>
		<li>Pedestrian Hybrid Beacon—<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> a special type of hybrid beacon </span>used to warn and control traffic at an unsignalized location to assist pedestrians in crossing a street or highway at a marked crosswalk.</li>
	</ol>

	</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Identification Marker—a shape, color, and/or pictograph that is used as a visual identifier for a destination guide signing system of a community wayfinding system or a shared-use path system for an area.</li></span>

      <li>Inherently Low Emission Vehicle (ILEV)—any kind of vehicle that, because of inherent properties of the fuel system design, will not have significant evaporative emissions, even if its evaporative emission control system has failed.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
		<span class="text_added"><li>In-Roadway Warning Lights—see Highway Traffic Signal.</li></span>
	</div>

      <li>Interchange—a system of interconnecting roadways providing for traffic movement between two or more highways that do not intersect at grade.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
		<span class="text_added"><li>Interchange Lane Drop—see Lane Drop.</li></span>
	</div>

      <li><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Preemption </span>Interconnection—<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">when used in Part 8, </span>the electrical connection between the railroad or light rail transit active warning system and the highway traffic signal controller assembly for the purpose of preemption.</li>

      <li>Intermediate Interchange—an interchange with an urban or rural route that is not a major or minor interchange as defined in this Section.</li>

      <li>Intersection—intersection is defined as follows: 

      <ol type="a">
        <li>The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling on different highways that join at any other angle might come into conflict.</li>

        <li>The junction of an alley<span class="text_added">,</span> <span class="text_deleted">or </span>driveway<span class="text_added">, or site roadway</span> with a <span class="text_added">public </span>roadway or highway shall not constitute an intersection, unless the <span class="text_added">public </span>roadway or highway at said junction is controlled by a traffic control device.</li>

        <li>If a highway includes two roadways <span class="text_added">separated by a median</span><span class="text_deleted">that are 30 feet or more apart (see definition of Median)</span>, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be a separate intersection<span class="text_added"> if the opposing left-turn paths cross and there is sufficient interior storage for the design vehicle. (see <a href="part2a.xhtml#figure2A05">Figure 2A-05</a>)</span>.</li>

        <div class="text_deleted">If both intersecting highways include two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two roadways of such highways shall be a separate intersection.</div>

        <li>At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of the distance between the separate intersections as defined in (c)<span class="text_deleted"> and (d)</span> above: 

        <ol>
          <li>If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated on the roadway (within the median) between the separate intersections, the two intersections and the roadway (median) between them shall be considered as one intersection;</li>

          <li>Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk is designated on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and/or beyond the designated stop line or yield line shall be part of the intersection; and</li>

          <li>Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure from the intersection, the intersection shall include the area extending to the far side of such crosswalk.</li>
        </ol></li>
      </ol></li>

    <div class="change_from_npa">
		<span class="text_added"><li>Intersection Control Beacon—see Beacon.</li></span>
	</div>

      <li>Interval—the part of a signal cycle during which signal indications do not change.</li>

      
      <li>Island—a defined area between traffic lanes for control of vehicular movements, for toll collection, or for pedestrian <span class="text_added change_from_npa">or bicyclist </span>refuge. It includes all end protection and approach treatments. Within an intersection area, a median or an outer separation is considered to be an island.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Jughandle Turn—a left-turn or U-turn that, in conjunction with special geometry, is made by initially making a right-turn or diverging to the right. With other special geometry, a right-turn or U-turn makes a jughandle turn by initially making a left-turn or diverting to the left.</li></span>

      <li>Lane Drop—<span class="text_deleted">see Dropped Lane.</span>a through lane that becomes a mandatory turn lane on a conventional roadway, or a through lane that becomes a mandatory exit lane on a freeway or expressway. The end of an acceleration lane and reductions in the number of through lanes that do not involve a mandatory turn or exit are not considered <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">dropped lanes</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">lane drops</span>.</li>

      <li>Lane Line Markings—white pavement marking lines that delineate the separation of traffic lanes that have the same direction of travel on a roadway.</li>

      <div class="change_from_npa">
		<span class="text_added"><li>Lane Reduction—elimination of a through lane by a gradual narrowing of the travel pavement (taper) through physical construction or pavement markings at which traffic in the lane being eliminated must merge into the adjacent through lane and continue in the same direction of travel. A lane reduction can occur outside the influence of an intersection or interchange, or within an interchange a short distance downstream of the gore of an exit ramp. Through lanes that become a mandatory turn or exit are considered lane drops rather than lane reductions.</li></span>
		<span class="text_added"><li>Lane-Use Control Signal—see Highway Traffic Signal.</li></span>
	</div>

      <li>Legend—see Sign Legend.</li>

      <li>Lens—see Signal Lens.</li>

      <li>Light Rail Transit Traffic (Light Rail Transit Equipment)—every device in, upon, or by which any person or property can be transported on light rail transit tracks, including single-unit light rail transit cars (such at streetcars and trolleys) and assemblies of multiple light rail transit cars coupled together.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Loading Zone—a specially marked, signed or designated area for the loading or unloading of vehicles (passenger or freight).</li></span>

      <li>Locomotive Horn—an air horn, steam whistle, or similar audible warning device (see 49 CFR Part 229.129) mounted on a locomotive or control cab car. The terms “locomotive horn,” “train whistle,” “locomotive whistle,” and “train horn” are used interchangeably in the railroad industry.</li>

      <li>Logo—a distinctive emblem or trademark that identifies a commercial <span class="text_added">or non-commercial </span>business<span class="text_added">, program, or organization</span><span class="text_deleted"> and/or the product or service offered by the business</span>.</li>

      <li>Longitudinal Markings—pavement markings that are generally placed parallel and adjacent to the flow of traffic such as lane lines, center lines, edge lines, channelizing lines, and others.</li>

      <li>Louver—see Signal Louver.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Low-Volume Rural Road—A category of paved or unpaved conventional or special-purpose roadways having an AADT or less than 400 vehicles and lying outside of built-up or urbanized areas of cities, towns, and communities.</li></span>

      <li>Major Interchange—an interchange with another freeway or expressway, or an interchange with a high-volume multi-lane highway, principal urban arterial, or major rural route where the interchanging traffic is heavy or includes many road users unfamiliar with the area.</li>

      <li>Major Street—the street normally carrying the higher volume of vehicular traffic.</li>

      <li>Malfunction Management Unit—<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">same as</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">see</span> Conflict Monitor.</li>

      <li>Managed Lane—a highway lane or set of lanes, or a highway facility, for which variable operational strategies such as direction of travel, tolling, pricing, and/or vehicle type or occupancy requirements are implemented and managed in real-time in response to changing conditions. Managed lanes are typically buffer-<span class="text_added change_from_npa">separated</span> or barrier-separated lanes parallel to the general-purpose lanes of a highway in which access is restricted to designated locations. There are also some highways on which all lanes are managed.</li>

      <li>Manual Lane—see Attended Lane<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> within the definition of Toll Collection</span>.</li>

      <div class="change_from_npa"><li>Maximum Highway Traffic Signal Preemption Time—the maximum amount of time needed following initiation of the preemption sequence for the highway traffic signals to complete the timing of the right-of-way transfer time, queue clearance time, and separation time.</li>
</div>

      <li>Median—<span class="text_added">the portion of a highway separating opposing directions of the traveled way<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> or</span> </span>the area between two roadways of a divided highway measured from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way. The median excludes turn lanes. The median width might be different between intersections, interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.</li>

      <li>Minimum Track Clearance Distance—<span class="text_deleted">for standard two-quadrant warning devices, the minimum track clearance distance is </span>the length along a highway <span class="text_added">over the track(s) where a vehicle could be struck by rail traffic</span><span class="text_deleted">at one or more railroad or light rail transit tracks, measured from the highway stop line, warning device, or 12 feet perpendicular to the track center line, to 6 feet beyond the track(s) measured perpendicular to the far rail, along the center line or edge line of the highway, as appropriate, to obtain the longer distance</span>. <span class="text_added">The minimum track clearance distance is measured from a point upstream from the track(s0 on the approach to the grade crossing to a point downstream from the track(s) on the departure from the grade crossing. The length along the highway between the two points is the minimum track clearance distance.</span><span class="text_deleted">For Four-Quadrant Gate systems, the minimum track clearance distance is the length along a highway at one or more railroad or light rail transit tracks, measured either from the highway stop line or entrance warning device, to the point where the rear of the vehicle would be clear of the exit gate arm. In cases where the exit gate arm is parallel to the track(s) and is not perpendicular to the highway, the distance is measured either along the center line or edge line of the highway, as appropriate, to obtain the longer distance.</span></li>

      <div class="text_deleted">Minimum Warning Time—when used in <a href="part8_toc.html">Part 8</a>, the least amount of time active warning devices shall operate prior to the arrival of rail traffic at a grade crossing.</div>

      <li>Minor Interchange—an interchange where traffic is local and very light, such as interchanges with land service access roads. Where the sum of the exit volumes is estimated to be lower than 100 vehicles per day in the design year, the interchange is classified as local.</li>

      <li>Minor Street—the street normally carrying the lower volume of vehicular traffic.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Mixed-Use Alignment—a light rail transit track(s), a busway, or a bus only lane(s) where the <span class="text_added change_from_npa">light rail transit (</span>LRT<span class="text_added change_from_npa">)</span> or <span class="text_added change_from_npa">bus rapid transit (</span>BRT<span class="text_added change_from_npa">)</span> vehicles operate in mixed traffic with all types of road users. This includes streets, transit malls, and pedestrian malls where the right-of-way is shared. In a mixed-use alignment, the light rail transit or the bus rapid transit traffic does not have the right-of-way over other road users at grade crossings and intersections. If the LRT traffic or buses are controlled by traffic control signals or LRT signal faces at an intersection with a roadway, the alignment is considered to be mixed-use even if some of the approaches to the intersection are used exclusively by LRT traffic or buses.</li></span>

      <li>Movable Bridge Resistance Gate—a type of traffic gate, which is located downstream of the movable bridge warning gate, that provides a physical deterrent to vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic when placed in the appropriate position.</li>

      <div class="change_from_npa">
		<span class="text_added"><li>Movable Bridge Signal—see Highway Traffic Signal.</li></span>
	</div>

      <li>Movable Bridge Warning Gate—a type of traffic gate designed to warn, but not primarily to block, vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic when placed in the appropriate position.</li>

      <li>Multi-Lane—more than one lane moving in the same direction. A multi-lane street, highway, or roadway has a basic cross-section comprised of two or more through lanes in one or both directions. A multi-lane approach has two or more lanes moving toward the intersection, including turning lanes.</li>

      <li>Neutral Area—the paved area between the channelizing lines separating an entrance or exit ramp or a channelized turn lane or channelized entering lane from the adjacent through lane(s).</li>

      <li>Object Marker—a device used to mark obstructions within or adjacent to the roadway.</li>

      <li>Occupancy Requirement—any restriction that regulates the use of a facility or one or more lanes of a facility for any period of the day based on a specified <span class="text_added change_from_npa">minimum </span>number of persons in a vehicle.</li>

      <li>Occupant—a person driving or riding in a car, truck, bus, or other vehicle.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>On-Street Parking—parking within or along, and accessed directly from, a public roadway or a site roadway open to public travel.</li></span>

      <li>Open-Road ETC Lane—a non-attended lane that is designed to allow toll payments to be electronically collected from vehicles traveling at normal highway speeds. Open-Road ETC lanes are typically physically separated from the toll plaza, often following the alignment of the mainline lanes, with toll plaza lanes for cash toll payments being on a different alignment after diverging from the mainline lanes or a subset thereof.</li>

      

      <li>Open-Road Tolling Point—the location along an Open-Road ETC lane at which roadside or overhead detection and receiving equipment are placed and vehicles are electronically assessed a toll.</li>

      <li>Opposing Traffic—vehicles that are traveling in the opposite direction. At an intersection, vehicles entering from an approach that is approximately straight ahead would be considered to be opposing traffic, but vehicles entering from approaches on the left or right would <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">not </span>be considered to be <span class="text_added change_from_npa">conflicting traffic rather than </span>opposing traffic.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Option Lane—<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">a</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">A</span> lane <span class="text_added change_from_npa">on a freeway, expressway, or conventional road multi-lane exit or multi-lane split </span>that widens on the approach to<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">, then splits into two lanes at, the theoretical gore of a decision point or bifurcation to</span> allow <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">traffic within the lane the option to continue on either route</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">access,</span> without changing lanes<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">.</span><span class="text_added">, to:</span></li></span>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<span class="text_added">
		<ol type="a">
			<li>Both an exit lane and the mainline at a freeway or expressway exit; or</li>
			<li>Both diverging roadways at a freeway, expressway, or conventional road split.</li>
		</ol>
	</span>
	</div>

      <li>Overhead Sign—a sign that is placed such that a portion or the entirety of the sign or its support is directly above the roadway or shoulder such that vehicles travel below it. Typical installations include signs placed on cantilever arms that extend over the roadway or shoulder, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">signs placed </span>on sign support structures that span the entire width of the pavement, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">signs placed </span>on mast arms or span wires <span class="text_added">either independently or </span>that also support traffic control signals, and <span class="text_added change_from_npa">signs placed </span>on highway bridges that cross over the roadway.</li>

      <li>Parking Area—a parking lot or parking garage that is separated from a roadway. Parallel<span class="text_added">, perpendicular,</span> or angle parking spaces along a roadway are not considered a parking area.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Parking Space—an area marked or designated for storage of a vehicle while the driver is not present.</li></span>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<span class="text_added">
		<li>Preemption Clearance Interval—the part of a traffic signal sequence displayed as a result of a preemption request when vehicles are provided the opportunity to clear the railroad or light rail transit tracks, or a movable bridge, prior to the arrival of the train or boat for which the traffic signal is being preempted.</li>
		<li>Preemption Time Variability—the result that occurs when the traffic signal controller enters the Preemption Clearance Interval with less than the maximum design Right-of-Way Transfer Time or the speed of a train approaching the grade crossing varies.</li>
	</span>
	</div>

      <li>Passive Grade Crossing—a grade crossing where none of the automatic traffic control devices associated with an Active Grade Crossing Warning System are present and at which the traffic control devices consist entirely of signs and/or markings.</li>

      <li>Pathway—a general term denoting a public way for purposes of travel by authorized users outside the traveled way and physically separated from the roadway by an open space or barrier and either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. Pathways include shared-use paths, but do not include sidewalks.</li>

      <li>Pathway Grade Crossing—the general area where a pathway and railroad or light rail transit tracks cross at the same level, within which are included the tracks, pathway, and traffic control devices for pathway traffic traversing that area.</li>

      <li>Paved—<span class="text_added">having a roadway surface that has both a structural (weight bearing) and a sealing purpose for the roadway, such as </span>a bituminous surface treatment, mixed bituminous concrete, or Portland cement concrete <span class="text_deleted">roadway surface that has both a structural (weight bearing) and a sealing purpose for the roadway</span>.</li>

      <li>Pedestrian—a person on foot, in a wheelchair, on <span class="text_added change_from_npa">other devices determined by local law to be equivalent, which might include </span>skates<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span> or <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">on </span>a skateboard.</li>

      <li>Pedestrian Change Interval—an interval during which the flashing UPRAISED HAND (symbolizing DONT WALK) signal indication is displayed.</li>

      <li>Pedestrian Clearance Time—the time provided for a pedestrian crossing in a crosswalk, after leaving the curb or <span class="text_deleted">shoulder</span><span class="text_added">edge of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">traveled way</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">pavement</span></span>, to travel to the far side of the traveled way or to a median.</li>

      <li>Pedestrian Facilit<span class="text_deleted">ies</span><span class="text_added">y</span>—a general term denoting <span class="text_added">a location where </span>improvements and provisions made to accommodate or encourage <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">walking</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">pedestrian activity</span>.</li>

    <div class="change_from_npa">
	<span class="text_added">
		<li>Pedestrian Hybrid Beacon—see Hybrid Beacon.</li>
	</span>
	</div>

      <li>Pedestrian Signal Head—a signal head, which contains the symbols WALKING PERSON (symbolizing WALK) and UPRAISED HAND (symbolizing DONT WALK), that is installed to direct pedestrian<span class="text_added change_from_npa">s</span> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">traffic </span>at a traffic control signal.</li>

      <li>Permissive Mode—a mode of traffic control signal operation in which left or right turns are permitted to be made after yielding to pedestrians, if any, and/or opposing traffic, if any. When a CIRCULAR GREEN signal indication is displayed, both left and right turns are permitted unless otherwise prohibited by another traffic control device. When a flashing YELLOW ARROW or flashing RED ARROW signal indication is displayed, the turn indicated by the arrow is permitted.</li>

      <li>Physical Gore—a longitudinal point where a physical barrier or the lack of a paved surface inhibits road users from crossing from a ramp or channelized turn lane or channelized entering lane to the adjacent through lane(s) or vice versa.</li>

      <li>Pictograph—a pictorial representation used to identify a governmental jurisdiction<span class="change_from_npa">, an area of jurisdiction,</span> a governmental <span class="text_added">or other public transportation </span>agency, <span class="change_from_npa">a military base or branch of service, a governmental-approved university or college,<span class="text_deleted"><span class="text_added">or</span> a toll payment system<span class="text_deleted">, or</span></span> a government-approved institution<span class="text_added">, or a toll payment system</span></span>.</li>

      <li>Plaque—a traffic control device intended to communicate specific information to road users through a word, symbol, or arrow legend that is placed immediately adjacent to a sign to supplement the message on the sign. The difference between a plaque and a sign is that a plaque cannot be used alone. The designation for a plaque includes a “P” suffix.</li>

      <li>Platoon—a group of vehicles or pedestrians traveling together as a group, either voluntarily or involuntarily, because of traffic signal controls, geometrics, or other factors.</li>

      <div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>Portable Traffic Control Signal—see Highway Traffic Signal.</li>
		<li>Post-Exit Ramp Lane Reduction—see Lane Reduction.</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>Post-Mounted Sign—a sign that is placed to the side of the roadway such that no portion of the sign or its support is directly above the roadway or shoulder.</li>

      <li>Posted Speed Limit—a speed limit determined by law or regulation and displayed on Speed Limit signs.</li>

      <li>Preemption—the transfer of normal operation of a traffic control signal <span class="text_added">or a hybrid beacon </span>to a special control mode of operation.</li>

      <li>Preferential Lane—a highway lane <span class="text_added">or set of lanes, or a highway facility, </span>reserved for the exclusive use of one or more specific types of vehicles or <span class="text_added change_from_npa">of </span>vehicles with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">at least </span>a specific <span class="text_added change_from_npa">minimum </span>number of occupants.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>Pre-Signal—see Highway Traffic Signal.</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>Pretimed Operation—a type of traffic control signal operation in which none of the signal phases function on the basis of actuation.</li>

      <li>Primary Signal Face—one of the required or recommended minimum number of signal faces for a given approach or separate turning movement, but not including near-side signal faces required as a result of the far-side signal faces exceeding the maximum distance from the stop line.</li>

      <li>Principal Legend—place names, street names, and route numbers <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">placed</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">displayed</span> on guide signs.</li>

      <li>Priority Control—a means by which the assignment of right-of-way is obtained or modified.</li>

      <li>Private Road<span class="text_deleted"> Open to Public Travel</span>—<span class="text_added">see Site Roadways Open to Public Travel</span><span class="text_deleted">private toll roads and roads (including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road) within shopping centers, airports, sports arenas, and other similar business and/or recreation facilities that are privately owned, but where the public is allowed to travel without access restrictions. Roads within private gated properties (except for gated toll roads) where access is restricted at all times, parking areas, driving aisles within parking areas, and private grade crossings shall not be included in this definition</span>.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Professional Engineer (P.E.)—An individual who has fulfilled education and experience requirements and passed examinations that, under State licensure laws, permit the individual to offer engineering services within areas of expertise directly to the public.</li></span>

      <li>Protected Mode—a mode of traffic control signal operation in which left or right turns are permitted to be made <span class="text_added change_from_npa">only </span>when a left or right GREEN ARROW signal indication is displayed.</li>

      <li>Public Road—any road, street, or similar facility under the jurisdiction of and maintained by a public agency and open to public travel.</li>

      <li>Push<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> B</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">b</span>utton—a button to activate a device or signal timing for pedestrians, bicyclists, or other road users.</li>

      <li>Push<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> B</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">b</span>utton Information Message—a recorded message that can be actuated by pressing a pushbutton when the walk interval is not timing and that provides the name of the street that the crosswalk associated with that particular pushbutton crosses and can also provide other information about the intersection signalization or geometry.</li>

      <li>Push<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> B</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">b</span>utton Locator Tone—a repeating sound that informs approaching pedestrians that a pushbutton exists to actuate pedestrian timing or receive additional information and that enables pedestrians <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">who have visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">with vision</span> disabilities to locate the push<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> </span>button.</li>

      <li>Queue Clearance Time—when used in Part 8, the time required for the design vehicle of maximum length stopped just inside the minimum track clearance distance to start up and move through and clear the entire minimum track clearance distance.<span class="text_deleted"> If pre-signals are present, this time shall be long enough to allow the vehicle to move through the intersection, or to clear the tracks if there is sufficient clear storage distance. If a Four-Quadrant Gate system is present, this time shall be long enough to permit the exit gate arm to lower after the design vehicle is clear of the minimum track clearance distance.</span></li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>Queue Cutter Signal—see Highway Traffic Signal.</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>Quiet Zone—a segment of a rail line, with<span class="text_added">in which is situated</span> one or a number of consecutive public highway-rail grade crossings at which locomotive horns are not routinely sounded per 49 CFR Part 222.</li>

      <li>Rail Traffic—every device in, upon, or by which any person or property can be transported on rails or tracks and to which all other traffic must yield the right-of-way by law at grade crossings, including trains, one or more locomotives coupled (with or without cars), other railroad equipment, and light rail transit operating in exclusive or semi-exclusive alignments. Light rail transit operating in a mixed-use alignment, to which other traffic is not required to yield the right-of-way by law, is a vehicle and is not considered to be rail traffic.</li>

      <li>Raised Pavement Marker—a device mounted on or in a road surface that has a height generally not exceeding approximately 1 inch above the road surface for a permanent marker, or not exceeding approximately 2 inches above the road surface for a temporary flexible marker, and that is intended to be used as a positioning guide and/or to supplement or substitute for pavement markings.<span class="text_added"> Raised pavement markers might also be recessed into or flush with the pavement surface.</span></li>

      <div class="change_from_npa">
		<span class="text_added"><li>Ramp Control Signal—see Highway Traffic Signal.</li></span>
      <div class="text_deleted">Ramp Meter—see Ramp Control Signal.</div>
		</div>

      <li>Red Clearance Interval—an interval that follows a yellow change interval and precedes the next conflicting green interval.</li>

		<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_deleted"><span class="text_added">Reconstructed—a term used to describe a roadway or a traffic control device. When used to describe a roadway, it describes a roadway that has been rebuilt or restored to its former use or that has been improved through a major renovation of its structural elements. When used to describe a traffic control device, it descibes a device that has been rebuilt or improved through major renovations of its structural or control elements.</span></span></div>

      <li>Regulatory Sign—a sign that gives notice to road users of traffic laws or regulations.</li>

      <li>Retroreflectivity—a property of a surface that allows a large portion of the light coming from a point source to be returned directly back to a point near its origin.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
      <span class="text_deleted"><div>Right-of-Way [Assignment]—the permitting of vehicles and/or pedestrians to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to other vehicles or pedestrians by the display of a sign or signal indications.</div>

		<span class="text_added"><div>Right-of-Way, Public Highway—the limits of real property, including the traveled way, shoulders, median, and the land alongside, that are owned by the public highway agency having jurisdiction. The land within these limits is dedicated to highway uses, including roadside areas such as rest areas, scenic overlooks, and weigh stations.</div></span></span>
	</div>
      <span class="text_deleted"><div>Right-of-Way Transfer Time—when used in <a href="part8_toc.html">Part 8</a>, the maximum amount of time needed for the worst case condition, prior to display of the track clearance green interval. This includes any railroad or light rail transit or highway traffic signal control equipment time to react to a preemption call, and any traffic control signal green, pedestrian walk and clearance, yellow change, and red clearance intervals for conflicting traffic.</div></span>
	
      <li>Road—see Roadway.</li>

      <li>Road User—a vehicle operator, bicyclist, or pedestrian, including persons with disabilities, within the highway or on a <span class="text_deleted">private road</span><span class="text_added">site roadway</span> open to public travel.</li>

      <li>Roadway—that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel and parking lanes, but exclusive of the sidewalk, berm, or shoulder even though such sidewalk, berm, or shoulder is used by persons riding bicycles or other human-powered vehicles. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term roadway as used in this Manual shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively.</li>

      <li>Roadway Network—a geographical arrangement of intersecting roadways.</li>

      <li>Roundabout—a circular intersection with yield control at entry, which permits a vehicle on the circulatory roadway to proceed, and with deflection of the approaching vehicle counter-clockwise around a central island.</li>

      <li>Rumble Strip—a series of intermittent, narrow, transverse areas of rough-textured, slightly raised, or depressed road surface that extend across the travel lane to alert <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">road users</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vehicle operators</span> to unusual traffic conditions or are located along the shoulder, along the roadway center line, or within islands formed by pavement markings to alert road users that they are leaving the travel lanes.</li>

      <li>Rural Highway—a type of roadway normally characterized by lower volumes, higher speeds, fewer turning conflicts, and less conflict with pedestrians.</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><div>Safe-Positioned—the positioning of emergency vehicles at an incident in a manner that attempts to protect both the responders performing their duties and road users traveling through the incident scene, while minimizing, to the extent practical, disruption of the adjacent traffic flow.</div></span>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>Scanning Graphic—a graphic designed for scanning by machine, and includes bar codes, quick-repsonse (QR) codes or other matrix bar code formats, or similar graphics.</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>School—a public or private educational institution recognized by the state education authority for one or more grades K through 12 or as otherwise defined by the State.</li>

      <li>School Zone—a designated roadway segment approaching, adjacent to, and beyond school buildings or grounds, or along which school related activities occur.</li>

      <li>Semi-Actuated<span class="text_deleted"> Operation</span>—a type of traffic control signal operation in which at least one, but not all, signal phases function on the basis of actuation.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Semi-Exclusive Aligment—a light rail transit track(s) or a bus rapid transit busway that is in a separate right-of-way or that is along a street or railroad right-of-way where motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians have limited access and cross only at designated locations, such as at grade crossings where road users must yield the right-of-way to the light rail transit or the bus rapid transit traffic.</li></span>

      <li>Separate Turn Signal Face—a signal face that exclusively controls a turn movement and that displays signal indications that are applicable only to the turn movement.</li>

      <div class="change_from_npa"><li>Separation Time—the component of maximum highway traffic signal preemption time during which the minimum track clearance distance is clear of vehicular traffic prior to the arrival of rail traffic.</li>
</div>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Serviceable—<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">the</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">a</span> condition <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">of</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">in which</span> a traffic control device <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">in which it </span>appears <span class="text_added change_from_npa">(day and night) </span>and operates as intended, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">until</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">beyond which</span> it requires replacement due to damage or wear. Wehther a device is serviceable will depend on the type of device under consideration. In general, if the device is capable of being serviced with minimal effort or replacement parts so that it continues to appear and operate as intended, and the device is otherwise substantially intact, then it can be considered to be in serviceable condition. If the device is damaged or not operational beyond reasonable repair, then it is likely no longer serviceable.</li></span>

      <li>Shared Roadway—a roadway that is officially designated and marked as a bicycle route, but which is open to motor vehicle travel and upon which no bicycle lane is designated.</li>

      <li>Shared Turn Signal Face—a signal face, for controlling both a turn movement and the adjacent through movement, that always displays the same color of circular signal indication that the adjacent through signal face or faces display.</li>

      <li>Shared-Use Path—a bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. Shared-use paths are also used by pedestrians (including skaters, users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and joggers) and other authorized motorized and non-motorized users.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Shoulder—a longitudinal area contiguous with the traveled way that is <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">primarily</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">used</span> for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses, and that is graded for emergency stopping. A shoulder might be paved or unpaved. A paved shoulder might be opened to part-time travel by some or all vehicles<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> and might also be available for use by pedestrians and/or bicycles in the absence of other pedestrian or bicycle facilities</span>.</li></span>

      <li>Sidewalk—that portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property line or on easements of private property that is paved or improved and intended for use by pedestrians.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>Sidewalk Extension—a pedestrian facility at an intersection or midblock crosswalk which extends the sidewalk by physically and visually narrowing the roadway.</li>
	</span></div>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Sidewalk Grade Crossing—the portion of a highway-rail grade crossing or of a highway-light rail transit grade crossing where a sidewalk and railroad tracks or a sidewalk and light rail transit tracks cross at the same level, within which there are included the tracks, sidewalk, and traffic control devices for sidewalk users traversing that area.</li></span>

      <li>Sign—<span class="text_added">with regard to controlling traffic, </span>any traffic control device that is intended to communicate specific information to road users through a word, symbol, and/or arrow legend. Signs do not include highway traffic signals, pavement markings, delineators, or channelization devices.<span class="text_added"> Signs whose purpose is unrelated to traffic control are addressed in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A02">Section <span class="text_deleted">1D.04</span><span class="text_added">1A.02</span></a>.</span></li>

      <li>Sign Assembly—a group of signs, located on the same support(s), that supplement one another in conveying information to road users.</li>

      <li>Sign Illumination—either internal or external lighting that shows similar color by day or night. Street or highway lighting shall not be considered as meeting this definition.</li>

      <li>Sign Legend—all word messages, logos, pictographs, and symbol and arrow designs that are intended to convey specific meanings. The border, if any, on a sign is not considered to be a part of the legend.</li>

      <li>Sign Panel—a separate panel or piece of material containing a word, <span class="text_added">logo, pictograph, </span>symbol, and/or arrow legend that is affixed to the face of a sign.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>Signal—See Highway Traffic Signal.</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>Signal Backplate—a thin strip of material that extends outward from and parallel to a signal face on all sides of a signal housing to provide a background for improved visibility of the signal indications.</li>

      <li>Signal Coordination—the establishment of timed relationships between adjacent traffic control signals.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Signal Dimming—a reduction of the light output from a signal indication, hybrid beacon, or rectangular rapid-flashing beacon indication, typically for nighttime conditions, to a value that is below the minimum specified intensity for daytime conditions. If a variety of intensity levels are used during daytime conditions and all of the various levels (including the lowest of the intensities) are above the minimum specified intensity for daytime conditions, this would not be considered to be signal dimming.</li></span>

      <li>Signal Face—an assembly of one or more signal sections that is provided for controlling one or more traffic movements on a single approach.</li>

      <li>Signal Head—an assembly of one or more signal faces that is provided for controlling traffic movements on one or more approaches.</li>

      <li>Signal Housing—that part of a signal section that protects the light source and other required components.</li>

      <li>Signal Indication—the illumination of a signal lens or equivalent device.</li>

      <li>Signal Lens—that part of the signal section that redirects the light coming directly from the light source and its reflector, if any.</li>

      <li>Signal Louver—a device that can be mounted inside a signal visor to restrict visibility of a signal indication from the side or to limit the visibility of the signal indication to a certain lane or lanes, or to a certain distance from the stop line.</li>

      <li>Signal Phase—the right-of-way, yellow change, and red clearance intervals in a cycle that are assigned to an independent traffic movement or combination of movements.</li>

      <li>Signal Section—the assembly of a signal housing, signal lens, if any, and light source with necessary components to be used for displaying one signal indication.</li>

		<li><span class="text_deleted">Interval</span><span class="text_added">Signal</span> Sequence<span class="text_added"> (Sequence of Indications)</span>—the order of appearance of signal indications during successive intervals of a signal cycle.</li>


      <li>Signal System—two or more traffic control signals operating in signal coordination.</li>

      <li>Signal Timing—the amount of time allocated for the display of a signal indication.</li>

      <li>Signal Visor—that part of a signal section that directs the signal indication specifically to approaching traffic and reduces the effect of direct external light entering the signal lens.</li>

      <li>Signing—individual signs or a group of signs, not necessarily on the same support(s), that supplement one another in conveying information to road users.</li>

      <div class="change_from_npa"><li>Simultaneous Preemption—notification of approaching rail traffic is forwarded to the highway traffic signal controller unit or assembly and railroad or light rail transit active warning devices at the same time.</li>
</div>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Site Roadways Open to Public Travel—Roadways and bikeways on sites of shopping centers, office parks, airports, schools, universities, sports arenas, recreational parks, and other similar business, governmental, and/or recreation facilities that are publicly or privately owned but where the public is allowed to travel without full-time access restrictions. Two types of roadways are not included in this definition: (1) roadways where access is restricted at all times by gates and/or guards to residents, employees or other specifically<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">-</span>authorized persons; and (2) private highway-rail grade crossings. Site roadways open to public travel do not include parking areas<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> (see definition in this Section)</span>, including the driving aisles (see <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Definition 148</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">definition in this Section</span>) within those parking areas.</li></span>

      <li>Special Purpose Road—a low-volume, low-speed road that serves recreational areas or resource development activities.</li>

      <li>Speed—speed is defined based on the following classifications: 

      <ol type="a">
        <li>Average Speed—the summation of the instantaneous or spot-measured speeds at a specific location of vehicles divided by the number of vehicles observed.</li>

        <li>Design Speed—a selected speed used to determine the various geometric design features of a roadway.</li>

        <li>85th-Percentile Speed—the speed at or below which 85 percent of the motor vehicles travel.</li>

        <li>Operating Speed—a speed at which a typical vehicle or the overall traffic operates. Operating speed might be defined with speed values such as the average, pace, or 85th-percentile speeds.</li>

        <li>Pace—the 10 mph speed range representing the speeds of the largest percentage of vehicles in the traffic stream.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Speed Limit—the maximum (or minimum) speed applicable to a section of highway as established by law or regulation.</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><div class="change_from_npa">Speed Measurement Markings—a white transverse pavement marking placed on the roadway to assist the enforcement of speed regulations.</div></span>

      <li>Speed Zone—a section of highway with a speed limit that is established by law or regulation, but which might be different from a legislatively specified statutory speed limit.</li>

      <li>Splitter Island—a median island used to separate opposing directions of traffic entering and exiting a roundabout.</li>

      <li>Station Crossing—a pathway grade crossing that is associated with a station platform.</li>

      <li>Statutory Speed Limit—a speed limit established by legislative action <span class="text_added change_from_npa">(<span class="text_deleted">e.g.,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">such as</span> Federal or State law) </span>that typically is applicable for a particular class of highways with specified design, functional, jurisdictional and/or location characteristics and that is not necessarily displayed on Speed Limit signs.</li>

      <li>Steady (Steady Mode)—the continuous display of a signal indication for the duration of an interval, signal phase, or consecutive signal phases.</li>

      <li>Stop Line—a solid white pavement marking line extending across approach lanes to indicate the point at which a stop is intended or required to be made.</li>

      <li>Street—see Highway.</li>

      <li>Supplemental Signal Face—a signal face that is not a primary signal face but which is provided for a given approach or separate turning movement to enhance visibility or conspicuity.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Swing Gate—a self-closing fence-type gate designated to swing open away from the track area and return to the closed position upon release.</li></span>

      <li>Symbol—the approved design of a pictorial <span class="text_added">or graphical </span>representation of a specific traffic control message for signs, pavement markings, traffic control signals, or other traffic control devices, as shown in the MUTCD.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>Temporary Traffic Control Signal—see Highway Traffic Signal.</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>Temporary Traffic Control Zone—an area of a highway<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, pedestrian, or bicycle facility</span> where road user conditions are changed because of a work zone or incident by the use of temporary traffic control devices, flaggers, uniformed law enforcement officers, or other authorized personnel.</li>

      <li>Theoretical Gore—a longitudinal point at the upstream end of a neutral area at an exit ramp or channelized turn lane where the channelizing lines that separate the ramp or channelized turn lane from the adjacent through lane(s) begin to diverge, or a longitudinal point at the downstream end of a neutral area at an entrance ramp or channelized entering lane where the channelizing lines that separate the ramp or channelized entering lane from the adjacent through lane(s) intersect each other.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Through Train—a train movement that continues without stopping or reversing direction throughout the entire length of the rail traffic detection circuit length approaching a highway-rail grade crossing.</li></span>

      <li>Timed Exit Gate Operating Mode—a mode of operation where the exit gate descent at a grade crossing is based on a predetermined time interval.</li>

      <li>Toll Booth—a shelter where a toll attendant is stationed to collect tolls or issue toll tickets. A toll booth is located adjacent to a toll lane and is typically set on a toll island.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>Toll Collection—manual or electronic methods and elements used to collect a fee for use of a toll facility. Toll collection methods include:</li>
	</span></div>
		<ol type="a">
			<li>Electronic Toll Collection (ETC)—a <span class="text_added change_from_npa">cashless </span>system for automated collection of tolls from moving or stopped vehicles through wireless technologies such as radio-frequency communication or optical scanning. ETC systems are classified as one of the following: 
				<ol type="1">
					<li><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">S</span>ystems that require users to have registered toll accounts, with the use of equipment inside or on the exterior of vehicles, such as a transponder or barcode decal, that communicates with or is detected by roadside or overhead receiving equipment, or with the use of license plate optical scanning, to automatically deduct the toll from the registered user account, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">or </span></li>
					<li><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">S</span>ystems that do not require users to have registered toll accounts because vehicle license plates are optically scanned and invoices for the toll amount are <span class="text_added change_from_npa">typically </span>sent through postal mail to the address of the vehicle owner<span class="text_deleted">.</span><span class="text_added">, or</span></li>
					<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added"><li>Systems that allow electronic toll collection for both registered and non-registered toll accounts.</li></span></div>
				</ol>
			</li>
			<li>Open-Road Tolling<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> (ORT)</span>—a system designed to allow electronic toll collection (ETC) from vehicles traveling at <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">normal highway</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">posted</span> speeds. Open-<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">R</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">r</span>oad <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">T</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">t</span>olling might be used on toll roads or toll facilities in conjunction with toll plazas. Open-<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">R</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">r</span>oad <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">T</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">t</span>olling is also typically used on managed lanes and on toll facilities that only accept payment by ETC.</li>

			<li><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Manual Toll Collection—a system of toll collection from stopped vehicles through acceptance of cash, toll tickets, tickets, or credit cards, and may involve issuance of receipts. Toll collection may be by a machine or toll booth attendant.</span>
				<ol type="1">
					<li>Toll-Ticket System—a system in which the user of a toll road receives a ticket from a machine or toll booth attendant upon entering a toll system. The ticket denotes the user’s point of entry and, upon exiting the toll system, the user surrenders the ticket and is charged a toll based on the distance traveled between the points of entry and exit.</li>
					<li>Attended Lane (Manual Lane)—a toll lane adjacent to a toll booth occupied by a human toll collector who makes change, issues receipts, and perform other toll-related functions. Attended lanes at toll plazas typically require vehicles to stop to pay the toll.</li>
					<li>Exact Change Lane (Automatic Lane)—a non-attended toll lane that has a receptacle into which road users deposit coins totaling the exact amount of the toll. Exact Change lanes at toll plazas typically require vehicles to stop to pay the toll.</li>
				</ol>
			</li>
		</ol>
      <li>Toll Island—a raised island on which a toll booth or other toll collection and related equipment are located.</li>

      <li>Toll Lane—an individual lane located within a toll plaza in which a toll payment is collected or, for toll-ticket systems, a toll ticket is issued.</li>

      <li>Toll Plaza—the location at which tolls are collected consisting of a grouping of toll booths, toll islands, toll lanes, and, typically, a canopy. Toll plazas might be located on highway mainlines or on interchange ramps. A mainline toll plaza is sometimes referred to as a barrier toll plaza because it interrupts the traffic flow.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Toll Road (facility)—a road or facility that is open to traffic only by payment of a user toll or fee.</li></span>

      <li>Traffic—pedestrians, bicyclists, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and other conveyances either singularly or together while using for purposes of travel any highway or <span class="text_deleted">private road</span><span class="text_added">site roadway</span> open to public travel.</li>

      <li>Traffic Control Device—a<span class="text_added">ll</span> sign<span class="text_added">s</span>, signal<span class="text_added">s</span>, marking<span class="text_added">s</span>, <span class="text_added">channelization devices, </span>or other device<span class="text_added">s</span> <span class="text_added">that use colors, shapes, symbols, words, sounds, and/or tactile information for the primary purpose of communicating</span><span class="text_deleted">used to</span> <span class="text_added change_from_npa">a </span>regulat<span class="text_deleted">e</span><span class="text_added">ory</span>, warn<span class="text_added">ing</span>, or guid<span class="text_deleted">e</span><span class="text_added">ance message<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span> to road users on</span> <span class="text_deleted">traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to </span>a street, highway, <span class="text_deleted">private road open to public travel, </span>pedestrian facility, <span class="text_added">bikeway, pathway, </span>or <span class="text_added">site roadway open to public travel</span><span class="text_deleted">shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction</span>.<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added"> Infrastructure elements that restrict the road user's travel paths or vehicle speeds, such as curbs, speed humps, and other raised roadway surfaces, are not traffic control devices. Transverse or longitudinal rumble strips are also not traffic control devices. Operational devices associated with the application of traffic control strategies such as in-vehicle electronics, fencing, roadway lighting, barriers, and attenuators are shown in the Manual for context but their design, application, and usage are not specified since they are not traffic control devices.</span></span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A02">Section 1A.02</a> contains information regarding items that are not traffic control devices.</span></li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>Traffic Control Signal (Traffic Signal)—see Highway Traffic Signal.</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>Train—one or more locomotives coupled, with or without cars, that operates on rails or tracks and to which all other traffic must yield the right-of-way by law at highway-rail grade crossings.</li>

      <li>Transverse Markings—pavement markings that are generally placed perpendicular and across the flow of traffic such as shoulder markings; word, symbol, and arrow markings; stop lines; crosswalk lines; <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">speed measurement markings; </span>parking space markings; and others.</li>

      <li>Traveled Way—the portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles, exclusive of the shoulders, berms, sidewalks, and parking lanes.</li>

      <li>Turn Bay—a lane for the exclusive use of turning vehicles that is formed on the approach to the location where the turn is to be made. In most cases where turn bays are provided, drivers who desire to turn must move out of a through lane into the newly<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">-</span>formed turn bay in order to turn. A through lane that becomes a turn lane is considered to be a <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">dropped </span>lane <span class="text_added change_from_npa">drop </span>rather than a turn bay.</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>Two-Stage Bicycle Turn Box—a designated area at an intersection intended to provide bicyclists a place to wait for traffic to clear before proceeding in a different direction of travel.</li>
	</span></div>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Uncontrolled Approach—an approach on which vehicles are not controlled by a traffic control signal, hybrid beacon, STOP sign, or YIELD sign.</li></span>

      <li>Upstream—a term that refers to a location that is encountered by traffic prior to a downstream location as it flows in an “upstream to downstream” direction. For example, “the upstream end of a lane line separating the turn lane from a through lane on the approach to an intersection” is the end of the line that is furthest from the intersection.</li>

      <li>Urban Street—a type of street normally characterized by relatively low speeds, wide ranges of traffic volumes, narrower lanes, frequent intersections and driveways, significant pedestrian traffic, and more businesses and houses.</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>Variable Message Sign—see Changeable Message Sign.</li></span>

      <li>Vehicle—every device in, upon, or by which any person or property can be transported or drawn upon a highway, except trains and light rail transit operating in exclusive or semi-exclusive alignments. Light rail transit equipment operating in a mixed-use alignment, to which other traffic is not required to yield the right-of-way by law, is a vehicle.</li>

      <li>Vibrotactile Pedestrian Device—an accessible pedestrian signal feature that communicates, by touch, information about pedestrian timing using a vibrating surface.</li>

      <li>Visibility-Limited Signal Face or Visibility-Limited Signal Section—a type of signal face or signal section designed (or shielded, hooded, or louvered) to restrict the visibility of a signal indication from the side, to a certain lane or lanes, or to a certain distance from the stop line.</li>

      <li>Walk Interval—an interval during which the WALKING PERSON (symbolizing WALK) signal indication is displayed.</li>

      

      <li>Warning Light—a portable, powered, yellow, lens-directed, enclosed light that is used in a temporary traffic control zone in either a steady burn or a flashing mode.</li>

      <li>Warning Sign—a sign that gives notice to road users of a situation that might not be readily apparent.</li>

      <li>Warrant—a warrant describes a threshold condition based upon average or normal conditions that, if found to be satisfied as part of an engineering study, shall result in analysis of other traffic conditions or factors to determine whether a traffic control device or other improvement is justified. Warrants are not a substitute for engineering judgment. The fact that a warrant for a particular traffic control device is met is not conclusive justification for the installation of the device.</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><div>Wayside Equipment—the signals, switches, and/or control devices for railroad or light rail transit operations housed within one or more enclosures located along the railroad or light rail transit right-of-way and/or on railroad or light rail transit property.</div></span>

      <li>Wayside Horn System—a stationary horn (or <span class="text_added change_from_npa">a </span>series of horns) located at a grade crossing that is used in conjunction with train-activated or light rail transit-activated warning systems to provide audible warning of approaching rail traffic to road users on the highway or pathway approaches to a grade crossing, either as a supplement or alternative to the sounding of a locomotive horn.</li>

      <li>Worker—a person on foot whose duties place him or her within the right-of-way of a street, highway, or pathway, such as<span class="text_added">:</span> <span class="text_deleted">street, highway, or pathway </span>construction and maintenance forces<span class="text_deleted">,</span><span class="text_added">;</span> survey crews<span class="text_deleted">,</span><span class="text_added">;</span> utility crews, responders to incidents within the <span class="text_deleted">street, highway, or pathway </span>right-of-way<span class="text_deleted">,</span><span class="text_added">;</span> and law enforcement personnel when directing traffic, investigating crashes, and handling lane closures, obstructed roadways, and disasters within the right-of-way<span class="text_deleted"> of a street, highway, or pathway</span>.</li>

      <li>Wrong-Way Arrow—a slender, elongated, white pavement marking arrow placed upstream from the ramp terminus to indicate the correct direction of traffic flow. Wrong-way arrows are intended primarily to warn wrong-way road users that they are going in the wrong direction.</li>

      <li>Yellow Change Interval—the first interval following the green or flashing arrow interval during which the steady yellow signal indication is displayed.</li>

      <li>Yield Line—a row of solid white isosceles triangles pointing toward approaching vehicles extending across approach lanes to indicate the point at which the yield is intended or required to be made.</li>
    </ol>

	<h3 id="section1C03">Section 1C.03 Meanings of Acronyms and Abbreviations <span class="text_added">Used </span>in this Manual</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>18. In Section 1C.03 (existing Section 1A.14), retitled, “Meanings of Acronyms and Abbreviations Used in this Manual,” FHWA proposes to delete the acronyms/abbreviations “EPA” and “TDD” and relocate the information to Part 2. FHWA proposes these revisions because these terms are only used in that Part of the MUTCD.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">Based  on  comments  the  acronyms/abbreviations EPA and TDD are retained.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to delete the acronyms/abbreviations “HOT,” “HOTM,” “HOTO,” “PCMS,” and “RRPM.” FHWA proposes these revisions because the terms are not used in the MUTCD text.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">These deletions are adopted as proposed, except that PCMS is retained because it is used in the MUTCD text of Parts 2 and 6.</p>

	<p>Lastly, FHWA proposes to add the abbreviations “cd/lx/m<sup>2</sup>,” “ft,” “in,” and “mi.” FHWA proposes these revisions because these abbreviations for light intensity and distances are used throughout the MUTCD.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">These additions are adopted as proposed. In addition, a new acronym is added for RRFB (rectangular rapid-flashing beacon) because it is used in the MUTCD.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1C03_para01">01</span><span class="standard">The following acronyms and abbreviations, when used in this Manual, shall have the following meanings:</span></p>

    <ol class="standard">
      <li>AADT—annual average daily traffic</li>

      <li>AASHTO—American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added"><li>AC—alternating current</li></span></div>

      <li>ADA—Americans with Disabilities Act</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><div class="change_from_npa">ADAAG—Americans with Disabilities Accessibility Guidelines</div></span>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>ADAS—Advanced Driver Assistance Systems</li>
		<li>ADS—Automated Driving System</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>ADT—average daily traffic</li>

      <li>AFAD—Automated Flagger Assistance Device</li>

      <li>ANSI—American National Standards Institute</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>AREMA—American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association</li>
		<li>AV—automated vehicle</li>
	</span></div>

		<span class="text_added"><li>cd/lx/m<sup>2</sup>—candelas per lux per square meter</li></span>

      <li>CFR—Code of Federal Regulations</li>

      <li>CMS—changeable message sign</li>

      <li>dBA—A-weighted decibels</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>DC—direct current</li>
		<li>DDT—Dynamic Driving Task</li>
	</span></div>

      <div class="change_from_npa"><li>EPA—Environmental Protection Agency</li>
</div>

      <li>ETC—electronic toll collection</li>

      <li>EV—electric vehicle</li>

      <li>FHWA—Federal Highway Administration</li>

      <li>FRA—Federal Railroad Administration</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>ft—foot or feet</li></span>

      <li>FTA—Federal Transit Administration</li>

      <span class="text_deleted"><div>HOT—high occupancy tolls</div></span>

      <span class="text_deleted"><div>HOTM—FHWA’s Office of Transportation Management</div></span>

      <span class="text_deleted"><div>HOTO—FHWA’s Office of Transportation Operations</div></span>

      <li>HOV—high-occupancy vehicle</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>IEEE—Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers</li>
		<li>IES—Illuminating Engineering Society</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>ILEV—inherently low<span class="text_deleted"> </span><span class="text_added">-</span>emission vehicle</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>in—inch(es)</li></span>

      <li>ISEA—International Safety Equipment Association</li>

      <li>ITE—Institute of Transportation Engineers</li>

      <li>ITS—intelligent transportation systems</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>L—taper length</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>LED—light<span class="text_deleted"> </span><span class="text_added">-</span>emitting diode</li>

      <li>LP—liquid petroleum</li>

      <li>LRT—light rail transit</li>

		<span class="text_added"><li>mi—mile(s)</li></span>

      <li>MPH or mph—miles per hour</li>

      <li>MUTCD—Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices<span class="text_added"> for Streets and Highways</span></li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>N—length of one line segment plus one gap of a broken line</li>
		<li>NCEES—National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>NCHRP—National Cooperative Highway Research Program</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>ODD—Operational Design Domain</li>
		<li>OPM—U.S. Office of Personnel Management</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>ORT—open-road tolling</li>

      <div class="change_from_npa"><li>PCMS—portable changeable message sign</li>
</div>

      <li>PRT—perception-response time</li>

      <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><div>RPM—raised pavement marker</div></span>

      <span class="text_deleted"><div>RRPM—raised retroreflective pavement marker</div></span>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>RRFB—rectangular rapid-flashing beacon</li>
	</span></div>

      <li>RV—recreational vehicle</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>SAE—Society of Automotive Engineering</li>
		<li>SHV—Specialized Hauling Vehicle</li>
		<li>SPF—safety performance function</li>
		<li>TA—Typical Application</li>
	</span></div>

      <div class="change_from_npa"><li>TDD—telecommunication devices for the deaf</li>
</div>

      <li>TRB—Transportation Research Board</li>

      <li>TTC—temporary traffic control</li>

      <li>U.S.—United States</li>

      <li>U.S.C.—United States Code</li>

      <li>USDOT—United States Department of Transportation</li>

      <li>UVC—Uniform Vehicle Code</li>

      <li>VPH or vph—vehicles per hour</li>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
		<li>V2I—vehicle-to-infrastructure</li>
	</span></div>
    </ol>

    
  </div>
</body>
</html>