<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 5B - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content" class="text_added">
    <h1>Chapter 5B. Provisions for Traffic Control Devices</h1>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>453. FHWA proposes a new chapter titled, “Chapter 5B Provisions for Traffic Control Devices” with sections regarding signs, markings, traffic signals, and temporary traffic control, as well as provisions for traffic control at railroad and light rail transit grade crossings, and traffic control for bicycle facilities.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">See Preamble of Federal Register for discussion of this item.</p>
	</div>

    <h3 id="section5B01">Section 5B.01 Signs</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>454. In new “Section 5B.01 Signs,” FHWA proposes to include Support and Guidance statements regarding signs. In the Guidance statement, FHWA recommends that signs be clearly associated to the specific lane/road to which they apply, such as parallel roads with different speed limits and that information spreading practices be employed to minimize informational load.</p>
	<p>FHWA also proposes that standard sign designs be retained as much as possible.</p>	
	<p>Finally, FHWA proposes that the illuminated portion of electronic signs should have a standard refresh/flicker rate, greater than 200 Hz. FHWA proposes this language to accommodate machine vision technology, while also helping human drivers.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">See Preamble of Federal Register for discussion of this item.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B01_para01">01</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS uses machine vision technology</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Driving automation systems use sensors, algorithms, and processing</span> to locate, read, and comprehend traffic signs and <span class="text_added change_from_npa">assist the human driver or AV in </span>appropriately <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">make</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">making</span> vehicle operational decisions. Location, condition, uniformity, design characteristics, and consistent application all affect the ability of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">machine vision</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation systems</span> to perform these functions.</span></p>

	<div class="text_added change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B01_para02">02</span><span class="standard">When scanning graphics (see <a href ="part2a.xhtml#section2A04">Section 2A.04</a>) of any type are used on a sign for support of driving automation systems, the scanning graphics shall not be visible to the human eye and the sign shall have no apparent loss of resolution or recognition for the road user.</span></p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B01_para03">03</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Agencies seeking to better accommodation driving automation systems to support AVs, while also potentially benefitting human drivers, should consider:</span></span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
		<li><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">S</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Clearly associating the s</span>ign location and application <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">should be clearly associated </span>with the displayed message to the specific lane or road to which it applies, such as in the case of parallel roads or lanes with different speed limits or restrictions.</li>
		<li>The practice of sign and information spreading (see <a href ="part2a.xhtml#section2A20">Section 2A.<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">19</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">20</span></a>) <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">should be used </span>to limit the amount of information displayed in one location or on one sign to minimize sign clutter.</li>
		<li>Signs with designs that are otherwise not provided for in this Manual or the <span class="text_added change_from_npa">"</span>Standard Highway Signs<span class="text_added change_from_npa">"</span> publication <span class="text_added change_from_npa">(see <a href ="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.05</a>) </span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">should use</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">are deisgned based on the</span> standardized sign design practices and features as provided for in this Manual for the type of sign, the location, and character<span class="text_added change_from_npa">istics</span> of the roadway on which it is used.</li>
		<li>The <span class="text_added change_from_npa">refresh rate of LEDs in the </span>illuminated portion of electronic-display signs <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">using LEDs should have a standard refresh/flicker rate. The refresh rate of the LEDs should be greater than 200 Hz to be easier for the camera to detect</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">to provide for greater consistency in driving automation system detection</span>.</li>
	</ol>

    <h3 id="section5B02">Section 5B.02 Markings</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>455. In new “Section 5B.02 Markings,” FHWA proposes to include Support and Guidance statements with a list of considerations that should be used to accommodate machine vision used to support the automation of vehicles and benefit the performance of the human vehicle operator. Most of these considerations are addressed in more detail in Part 3 and references are provided to the primary Sections. These considerations include uniform line widths, the use of dotted edge line extensions along all entrance and exit ramps, along all auxiliary lanes, and along all tapers where a deceleration or auxiliary lane is added, use of chevron markings in exit gore areas, continuous markings in work zones and in all lane transitions, and minimum dimensions for dashed lines.</p>
	<p>FHWA also proposes to recommend that raised pavement markers not be used as a substitute for markings and that decorative elements in crosswalks be avoided to minimize any potential confusion for automated systems.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">See Preamble of Federal Register for discussion of this item.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B02_para01">01</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS uses machine vision technology</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Driving automation systems use sensors, algorithms, and processing</span> to locate, read<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> and comprehend pavement markings. Location, condition, uniformity, design characteristics, and consistent application all have some effect on the ability of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">machine vision</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation systems</span> to perform this function. Certain pavement marking applications and practices have been shown through research to better support <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">AV operations</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation system technology</span>, while also benefiting, or at least not detracting from, the performance of the human operator.<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> Such practices include the following:</span></span></p>

	<div class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><ol type="A" class="support">
	<li>Normal-width longitudinal lines on freeways, expressways, and ramps of at least 6 inches wide (see <a href ="part3a.xhtml#section3A04">Section 3A.04</a>).</li>
	<li>Edge lines of at least 6 inches in width on roadways with posted speeds greater than 40 mph (see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B09">Section 3B.09</a>).</li>
	</ol></div>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">The following should be considered</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Agencies seeking</span> to better accommodate <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">machine vision</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation system</span> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">used </span>to support <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">the automation of vehicles</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">AVs, which also potentially benefitting human drivers, should consider</span>:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
	<li>Normal<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">-</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> </span>width longitudinal lines of at least 6 inches <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">wide on conventional roadways</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">in width (see <a href ="section3a.xhtml#section3A04">Section 3A.04</a>)</span>.</li>
	<li>Edge lines of at least 6 inches in width <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">on conventional roadways with posted speeds of 40 mph or less</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">(see <a href ="part3a.xhtml#section3A09">Sections 3A.04</a> and <a href ="part43b.xhtml#section3B09">3B.09</a>)</span>.</li>
	<li>Dotted edge line extensions along all entrance and exit ramps, all auxiliary lanes, and all tapers where a deceleration or auxiliary lane is added (see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B11">Section 3B.11</a>).</li>
	<li>Chevron markings <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">(see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B25">Section 3B.25</a>) </span>in the neutral areas of exit gores to distinguish them from travel lanes<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> (see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B25">Section 3B.25</a>)</span>.</li>
	<li>Continuous markings at the beginning of work zones and in all lane transitions.</li>
	<li>Raised pavement markers only as a supplement to, rather than as a substitute for, markings (see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B16">Sections 3B.16</a> and <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B17">3B.17</a>).</li>
	<li>Uniform contrast markings on light-colored pavements to create greater contrast.</li>
	<li>Broken lines <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">(see <a href ="part3b.xhtml#section3B06">Section 3B.06</a>) of at least 10 ft in length with a maximum gap of 30 ft</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">with uniform marking and gap length (see <a href ="part3a.xhtml#section3A04">Section 3A.04</a>)</span>.</li>
	<li>Avoidance of decorative elements in crosswalks.</li>
	</ol>

    <h3 id="section5B03">Section 5B.03 Highway Traffic Signals</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>456. In new “Section 5B.03 Highway Traffic Signals,” FHWA proposes to include a Guidance statement with a list of considerations that should be used to accommodate machine vision used to support the automation of vehicles and benefit the performance of the human vehicle operator. The list includes consistency along a corridor of traffic signal design and placement with respect to approach lanes, and consistent LED refresh rates greater than 200 Hz.</p>
	<p>In concert with this change, FHWA proposes a Support statement describing the challenges in achieving corridor-based consistency necessary for machine vision. Information is provided on the benefits of using vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) technology for traffic signal systems to address inconsistencies in a corridor.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">See Preamble of Federal Register for discussion of this item.</p></div>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B03_para01">01</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">The following considerations should be used</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Agencies seeking</span> to better accommodate <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">machine vision used</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation systems</span> to support <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">the automation of vehicles and benefit the performance of the human vehicle operator</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">AVs, while also potentially benefitting human drivers, should consider</span>:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
	<li><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Traffic signal design should be c</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">C</span>onsistent <span class="text_added change_from_npa">signal face placement </span>along corridors with respect to <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">the placement of signal faces </span>overhead <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">on span-wire and mast arms</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">mounting</span> versus post<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">-</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> </span>mounting on the side of the roadway.</li>
	<li><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">The</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Consistent</span> number of signal faces for approach lanes and the selection of signal indications and signal clusters <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">should be consistent </span>along a corridor to promote uniform displays for identical or similar situations.</li>
	<li>The refresh rate of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">the </span>LED traffic signals <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">should be consistent throughout the jurisdiction and be greater than 200 Hz to allow greater consistency in machine vision detection</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">to provide for greater consistency in driving automation system detection</span>.</li>
	<li class="text_added change_from_npa">Providing signal faces with backplates (see Section 4D.06) having retroreflective borders to enhance signal face conspicuity and detection by driving automation system sensors.</li>
	<li class="text_added change_from_npa">Using FLASHING YELLOW ARROW signal indications for permissive turns.</li>
	</ol>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B03_para02">02</span><span class="support text_added change_from_npa">Signal faces that display a CIRCULAR GREEN indication and that are located over or directly in line with a mandatory turn lane can be less effective for driving automation systems to recognize as a traffic signal face controlling permissive turning movements.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B03_para03">03</span><span class="support">Achieving uniformity along a corridor is desirable for <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">machine vision technology</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation systems</span>, but can be challenging. Multiple options are available for traffic signal displays to allow design variations based on specific intersection variables such as available overhead clearance, utility conflicts, signal support design constraints<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> and other factors. <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Where possible, connected and automated vehicles (CAV) needs with respect to traffic signals are better addressed through vehicle to infrastructure (V2I) for the reasons stated above and for</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">V2I capabilities can complement driving automation system recognition of traffic signals to improve</span> reliability and accuracy<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> of critical communications under all environmental conditions</span>.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section5B04">Section 5B.04 Temporary Traffic Control</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>457. In new “Section 5B.04 Temporary Traffic Control,” FHWA proposes Guidance and Standard statements regarding the use of signs and pavement markings to accommodate machine vision better and benefit the performance of the human vehicle operator in and through work zones. FHWA proposes that type of signs, spacing, and mounting height should follow the requirements in Part 6 and that the END ROAD WORK sign should be used to establish the end of the work zone.</p>
	<p>In the Standard, FHWA proposes existing pavement markings be maintained in all long-term stationary temporary traffic control zones in accordance with other referenced areas of the Manual. FHWA also proposes pavement markings match the alignment of the markings in place at both ends of the Temporary Traffic Control (TTC) zone and that they be placed along the entire length of any paved detour or temporary roadway prior to the detour or roadway being opened to road users. FHWA also proposes pavement markings in the temporary traveled way that are no longer applicable be removed or obliterated as soon as practical. As part of this requirement, FHWA proposes that pavement marking obliteration remove the non-applicable pavement marking material, the obliteration method minimize pavement scarring, and painting over existing pavement markings with black paint or spraying with asphalt shall not be accepted as a substitute for removal or obliteration. FHWA proposes these changes to accommodate machine vision of AVs, which might not have the capabilities to distinguish between markings that appear to conflict with one another in the same way that a human road user can.</p>

	<p>Finally, FHWA proposes a Guidance statement to recommend provisions to enhance the visibility of vertical panels, tubes, and other channelizing devices, as well as markings, to accommodate machine vision as well as human vehicle operators.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">See Preamble of Federal Register for discussion of this item.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para01">01</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Considerations should be given</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Agencies seeking</span> to better accommodate <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">machine vision used</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation systems</span> to support<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> the automation of vehicles and</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, which also potentially</span> benefit<span class="text_added change_from_npa">ting</span> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">the performance of </span>the human <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">vehicle operator</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">drivers,</span> in and through <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">work</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">temporary traffic control (TTC)</span> zones<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> should consider:</span></span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance text_added change_from_npa">
		<li>Consistent type, spacing, and mounting heights of signs (see <a href ="part6b.xhtml#section6B04">Sections 6B.04</a> and <a href ="part6f.xhtml#section6F02">6F.02</a>).</li>
		<li>Use of the END ROAD WORK (G20-2) sign to establish the end of the TTC zone (see <a href ="part6h.xhtml#section6H36">Section 6H.36</a>).</li>
		<li>Wider retroreflective material on, or reduced spacing of, channelizing devices to better accommodate driving automation system sensors in nighttime and adverse weather conditions (see <a href ="part6k.xhtml">Chapter 6K</a>).</li>
		<li>Continuous markings at the beginning of TTC zones and in lane transitions.</li>
		<li>Temporary raised pavement markings only as a supplement to, rather than as a substitute for, pavement markings.</li>
		<li>Removal or obliteration of pavement markings that are no longer applicable as soon as practicable, for long-term stationary operations in the temporary traveled way (see <a href ="part6j.xhtml#section6J01">Section 6J.01</a>).</li>
	</ol>

	<div class="text_added change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para02">02</span><span class="support">Pavement markings that are not fully removed and pavement scarring are of particular concern as there can be misinterpretation by driving automation systems that can result in erroneous vehicle positioning in TTC zones.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para03">03</span><span class="support">V2I communications can complement driving automation systems recognition in TTC zones by communicating the presence of a TTC zone to vehicles.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para04">04</span><span class="support"><a href ="part6j.xhtml#section6J01">Section 6J.01</a> describes the use of pavement markings in TTC zones and the removal or obliteration of existing pavement markings.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5B04_para05">05</span><span class="support"><a href ="part6j.xhtml#section6J02">Section 6J.02</a> describes the use of temporary pavement markings in TTC zones.</span></p>
	</div>

	<div class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><p><span class="guidance">The type of signs, spacing and mounting height should follow the requirements of <a href ="part6b.xhtml#section6B04">Section 6B.04</a> Advance Warning Area and 6F.02 Sign Placement. The END ROAD WORK (G20-2) sign should be used to establish the end of the work zone.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="standard">Existing pavement markings shall be maintained in all long-term stationary (see <a href ="part6g.xhtml#section6G02">Section 6G.02</a>) temporary traffic control zones in accordance with <a href ="part3a.xhtml">Chapters 3A</a> and <a href ="part3b.xhtml">3B</a>, except as otherwise provided for temporary pavement markings in <a href ="part6f.xhtml#section6F78">Section 6F.78</a>. Pavement markings shall match the alignment of the markings in place at both ends of the TTC zone. Pavement markings shall be placed along the entire length of any paved detour or temporary roadway prior to the detour or roadway being opened to road users.</span></p>

	<p><span class="standard">For long-term stationary operations, pavement markings in the temporary traveled way that are no longer applicable shall be removed or obliterated as soon as practical. Pavement marking obliteration shall remove the non-applicable pavement marking material, and the obliteration method shall minimize pavement scarring. Painting over existing pavement markings with black paint or spraying with asphalt shall not be accepted as a substitute for removal or obliteration.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">To better accommodate machine vision used to support the automation of vehicles, channelizing devices should be at least 8 inches wide with retroreflective material for reliable machine detection in all weather conditions. Markings entering the work zone and through lane shifts should be made with highly visible and continuous materials, not intermittent buttons and reflectors.</span></p></div>

    <h3 id="section5B05">Section 5B.05 Traffic Control for Railroad and Light Rail Transit Grade Crossings</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>458. In new “Section 5B.05 Traffic Control for Railroad and Light Rail Transit Grade Crossings,” FHWA proposes a Guidance statement recommending that placement of signs and markings be consistent within a corridor at both passive and active highway-rail grade crossings.</p>
	<p>In addition, FHWA proposes Guidance recommending that V2I communication be employed at a highway-rail grade crossing. Finally, FHWA proposes a Guidance statement recommending signs and pavement marking associated with railroad crossings and tracks that are no longer active be removed. FHWA proposes this language to accommodate machine vision better and benefit the performance of the human vehicle operator.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">New Section 5B.05 is adopted but with revised and updated Support and Guidance provisions based on comments.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B05_para01">01</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">For passive and active grade crossings, placement of signs and markings should be consistent along a corridor to promote uniformity and to improve the ability of machine vision technology to recognize highway-rail</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Agencies seeking to better accommodate driving automation systems to support AVs, which also potentially benefitting human drivers, at</span> grade crossings<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> should consider:</span></span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
		<li><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Consistent placement of signs and markings for passive and active grade crossings along a corridor to promote uniformity and to improve the ability of driving automation system technoogy to recognize grade crossings.</span></li>
		<li><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">To better accommodate machine vision used to support the automation of vehicles, the</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Removal of</span> signs and pavement markings associated with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">railroad</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">grade</span> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">crossings and tracks </span>that are <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">no longer active should be removed</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">out of service (see <a href ="part8a.xhtml#section8A09">Section 8A.09</a>)</span>.</li>
	</ol>

	<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><p><span class="guidance">For active grade crossings, V2I communication should be used to relay information on the arrival or presence of a train at a highway-rail grade crossing.</span></p></span>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B05_para02">02</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Where possible, CAV needs with respect to highway-rail grade crossings are better addressed through </span>V2I <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">infrastructure for reasons of</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">communications can complement driving automation system recognition of grade crossings to improve</span> reliability and accuracy<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> of critical communications under all environmental conditions</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, and to relay information on the arrival or presence of a train or LRT vehicle at a grade crossing</span>.</span></p>

    	<h3 id="section5B06">Section 5B.06 Traffic Control for Bicycle Facilities</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>459. In new “Section 5B.06 Traffic Control for Bicycle Facilities,” FHWA proposes a Guidance statement recommending that bicycle facilities be segregated from other vehicle traffic using physical barriers where practicable and that road markings are needed to denote the end of a bike lane that is merged with traffic. FHWA proposes this language to accommodate machine vision better and benefit the performance of the human vehicle operator.</p>
	
	<p class="fr-disp">New Section 5B.06 is adopted but with revised and updated Support and Guidance provoisions based on comments.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B06_para01">01</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">To</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Agencies seeking to</span> better accommodate <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">machine vision used</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation systems</span> to support <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">the automation of vehicles</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">AVs, while also potentially benefitting human road users, should consider:</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">, bicycle facilities should be segregated from other vehicle traffic using physical barriers where practicable.</span></span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance text_added change_from_npa">
		<li>Use of an END (R3-9dP) plaque with a BIKE LANE (R3-17) sign to indicate the end of a bicycle lane that is merging with other traffic (see <a href ="part2b.xhtml#section2B33">Sections 2B.33</a> and <a href ="part9b.xhtml#section9B04">9B.04</a>).</li>
		<li>Use of Bicycle Lane Ends (W9-5) and Bicycle Merging (W9-5a) warning signs in advance of the end of a bicycle lane and where a merging maneuver might occur (see <a href ="part9c.xhtml#section9C07">Section 9C.07</a>).</li>
	</ol>

	<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><p><span class="guidance">Road markings should indicate the end of a bike lane that is merged with other traffic.</span></p></span>

	<div class="text_added change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5B06_para02">02</span><span class="support">Bicycle facilities that are physically separated from motor vehicle traffic using vertical object or vertical separation can facilitation detection from driving automation system sensors (see <a href ="part9e.xhtml#section9E07">Section 9E.07</a>).</span></p>
	</div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>