<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 8A - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 8A. General</h1>

    <h3 id="section8A01">Section 8A.01 Introduction</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A01_para01">01</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Whenever</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Where</span> the acronym “LRT” is used in Part 8, it refers to “light rail transit.”</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A01_para02">02</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted">Part 8</span><span class="text_added">Chapters 8A, <a href="part8b.xhtml">8B</a>, <a href="part8c.xhtml">8C</a>, and <a href="part8d.xhtml">8D</a></span> describe<span class="text_deleted">s</span> the traffic control devices that are used at highway-rail and highway-LRT grade crossings. Unless otherwise provided in the text or on a figure or table, the provisions of <a href="part8_toc.html">Part 8</a> are applicable to both highway-rail and highway-LRT grade crossings. <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">When</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Where</span> the phrase “grade crossing” is used by itself without the prefix “highway-rail” or “highway-LRT,” it refers to both highway-rail and highway-LRT grade crossings.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A01_para03">03</span><span class="support"><a href="part8e.xhtml">Chapter 8E</a> describes the traffic control devices that are used at pathway and sidewalk grade crossings.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A01_para04">04</span><span class="support">Traffic control for grade crossings includes all signs, signals, markings, other warning devices, and their supports along highways approaching and at grade crossings. The function of this traffic control is to promote safety and provide effective operation of rail and/or LRT and highway traffic at grade crossings.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A01_para05">05</span><span class="support">For purposes of design, installation, operation, and maintenance of traffic control devices at grade crossings, it is recognized that the crossing of the highway and rail tracks is situated on a right-of-way available for the joint use of both highway traffic and railroad or LRT traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A01_para06">06</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted">T</span><span class="text_added">Grade crossings and the traffic control devices that are associated with them are unique in that in many cases, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">both </span>t</span>he highway agency or authority with jurisdiction<span class="text_deleted"> and</span><span class="text_added">,</span> the regulatory agency with statutory authority<span class="text_deleted">, </span><span class="text_added"> (</span>if applicable<span class="text_added">)</span>, <span class="text_added">and the railroad company or transit agency are </span>jointly <span class="text_deleted">determine the need and selection of devices at a grade crossing</span><span class="text_added">involved in the development of engineering judgment or the performance of an engineering study. This joint process is accomplished through the efforts of a Diagnostic Team</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> made up of the highway agency with jurisdiction, the regulatory agency with statutory authority (if applicable), and the railroad company and/or transit agency (if applicable)</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A01_para07">07</span><span class="support">In Part 8, the combination of <span class="text_added">traffic control </span>devices selected or installed at a specific grade crossing is referred to as a “traffic control system.”</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A01_para08">08</span><span class="support">The combination of railroad or LRT active traffic control devices used to inform road users at a grade crossing of the approach or presence of rail traffic and the necessary control equipment for the devices are referred to as a "grade crossing warning system." <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Part 1.1.1 of t</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">T</span>he "<span class="text_added change_from_npa">2023 </span>AREMA Communications <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">&amp;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">and</span> Signals Manual" <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">(see Section 1A.05) </span>published by the American Railway Engineering <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">&amp;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">and</span> Maintenance-of-Way Association (AREMA) contains further information about grade crossing warning systems.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A01_para09">09</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">T</span><span class="text_added">Except at grade crossings of privately-owned roadways, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">pathways, and sidewalks, </span>t</span>he traffic control devices, systems, and practices described in this Manual shall be used at all grade crossings open to public travel, consistent with Federal, State, and local laws and regulations.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">To promote an understanding of common terminology between highway and railroad and LRT signaling issues, definitions and acronyms pertaining to <a href="part8_toc.html">Part 8</a> are provided in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A13">Sections 1A.13</a> and <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A14">1A.14</a>.</span>
	</p></span>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A01_para10">10</span><span class="support">23 CFR 655.603 contains information on the applicability of this Manual at private grade crossings.</span></p>
	</span></div>

	<span class="text_added"><h3 id="section8A02">Section 8A.02 Highway-LRT Grade Crossings</h3></span>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A02_para01">01</span><span class="support">Part 8 also describes the traffic control devices that are used in locations where light rail <span class="text_added">transit (</span>LRT<span class="text_added">)</span> vehicles are operating along streets and highways in mixed traffic with <span class="text_deleted">automotive vehicles</span><span class="text_added"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">all types of </span>road users</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A02_para02">02</span><span class="support">LRT is a mode of <span class="text_deleted">metropolitan</span><span class="text_added">public</span> transportation that employs LRT vehicles (commonly known as light rail vehicles, streetcars, or trolleys) that operate on rails in streets in mixed traffic, and LRT traffic that operates in semi-exclusive rights-of-way, or in exclusive rights-of-way. <span class="text_added change_from_npa">Where the phrase "LRT" is used in Part 8, it refers to light rail vehicles, streetcars, and trolleys. </span>Grade crossings with LRT can occur at intersections or at midblock locations, including public and private driveways.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A02_para03">03</span><span class="support">An initial educational campaign along with an ongoing program to continue to educate new drivers is beneficial when introducing LRT operations to an area and, hence, new traffic control devices.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A02_para04">04</span><span class="support">LRT alignments can be grouped into one of the following three types<span class="text_added"> (see definitions in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a>)</span>:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <li>Exclusive: An LRT right-of-way that is grade-separated or protected by a fence or traffic barrier. Motor vehicles, pedestrians, and bicycles are prohibited within the right-of-way. <span class="text_deleted">Subways and aerial structures are included within this group. </span>This type of alignment does not have grade crossings and is not further addressed in Part 8.</li>

      <li>Semi-exclusive: An LRT alignment that is in a separate right-of-way or along a street or railroad right-of-way where motor vehicles, pedestrians, and <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">bicycles</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">bicyclists</span> have limited access and cross at designated locations only<span class="text_added">, such as at grade crossings where road users must yield the right-of-way to the light rail transit <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">or the bus rapid transit </span>traffic</span>.</li>

      <li>Mixed-use: An alignment where LRT operates in mixed traffic with all types of road users. <span class="text_deleted">This includes streets, transit malls, and pedestrian malls where the right-of-way is shared.</span><span class="text_added">In a mixed-use alignment, the light rail transit traffic does not have the right-of-way over other road users at grade crossings and intersections. If the LRT traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or LRT signal faces at an intersection with a roadway, the alignment is considered to be mixed-use even if some of the approaches to the intersection are used exclusively by LRT traffic.</span></li>
    </ol>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A02_para05">05</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted">When</span><span class="text_added">If</span> a highway-LRT grade crossing <span class="text_added">is </span>equipped with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">a </span>flashing-light <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">signal system</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">signals</span> <span class="text_added">and </span>is located <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">within </span>200 feet <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">of</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">or less from</span> an intersection or midblock location controlled by a traffic control signal, <span class="text_added">a pedestrian hybrid beacon, or an emergency-vehicle hybrid beacon, </span>the <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">highway </span>traffic control signal</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">intersection</span> should be provided with <span class="text_added change_from_npa">rail </span>preemption in accordance with <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F19">Section<span class="text_added change_from_npa">s</span> <span class="text_deleted">4D.27</span><span class="text_added">4F.19</span></a><span class="text_added"> and <a href="part8e.xhtml#section8D09">8D.09</a> unless otherwise determined by <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">a</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">the</span> Diagnostic Team</span>.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A02_para06">06</span><span class="option">Where LRT vehicles are operating in a mixed-use alignment, traffic signal priority or preemption may be used as determined by a Diagnostic Team.</span><span class="change_noted">Added to improve consistency</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A02_para07">07</span><span class="standard">Where LRT and railroads use the same tracks or adjacent tracks, the traffic control devices, systems, and practices for highway-rail grade crossings shall be used.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section8A03">Section <span class="text_deleted">8A.02</span><span class="text_added">8A.03</span> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Use of Standard Devices,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Traffic Control</span> Systems<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span> and Practices at <span class="text_deleted">Highway-Rail </span>Grade Crossings</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A03_para01">01</span><span class="support">Because of the large number of significant variables to be considered, no single standard system of traffic control devices is universally applicable for all <span class="text_deleted">highway-rail </span>grade crossings.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard">Traffic control devices, systems, and practices shall be consistent with the design and application of the Standards contained in this Manual.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A03_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Before any new <span class="text_deleted">highway-rail </span>grade crossing traffic control system is installed or before modifications are made to an existing system, approval shall be obtained from the highway agency with <span class="text_deleted">the </span>jurisdiction<span class="text_deleted">al and/or</span><span class="text_added">, the regulatory agency with</span> statutory authority<span class="text_added"> (if applicable)</span>, and <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">from </span>the railroad company<span class="text_added"> and/or transit agency</span>.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">The Diagnostic Team members shall <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">reach a determination</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">make a recommendation</span>, documented in an engineering study (see <a href="#section8A05">Section 8A.05</a>), on new grade crossing traffic control systems and on proposed changes to an existing grade crossing traffic control system. The Diagnostic Team <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">determination</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">recommendation</span> shall be made <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">after</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">based on</span> the Diagnostic Team<span class="text_added change_from_npa">'s</span> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">members reach a consensus during </span>site visits, meetings, conference calls, or a combination of some or all <span class="text_added change_from_npa">of </span>these methods.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A03_para04">04</span><span class="standard">Except as provided in <a href="#section8A03_para07">Paragraph <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">5</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">7</span></a><span class="text_added"> of this Section</span>, operational changes made to a grade crossing traffic control system <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">requiring the use of engineering judgment or an engineering study </span>shall be <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">conducted and approved</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">evaluated</span> by a Diagnostic Team.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A03_para05">05</span><span class="standard">Among the types of changes at a grade crossing for which a Diagnostic Team shall conduct an engineering study are<span class="text_added change_from_npa">:</span> additions<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> to</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, removals,</span> or modifications of the lanes approaching or traversing the grade crossing; <span class="text_added change_from_npa">additions or removals of tracks; significant changes in the number or speed of trains; significant changes in the number or speed of vehicles; addition of vehicle access near the grade crossing; </span>additions or modifications to sidewalks; additions or modifications to bicycle lanes, especially if a counter-flow <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">bike</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">bicycle</span> lane is added on a one-way street; changes to roadway use, including conversion to or from one-way operation or reversible lanes; <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">implementation of quiet zones; </span>and the installation of or significant operational changes to traffic control signals that might affect the grade crossing.</span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A03_para06">06</span><span class="option">A Diagnostic Team may conduct an engineering study and make recommendations as part of the Quiet Zone establishment process (see <a href="#section8A11">Section 8A.11</a>).</span></p>
	</span></div>

	<p><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section8A03_para07">07</span><span class="option"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">When</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Where</span> determined by the responsible public agency, the railroad company, and/or the transit agency, general maintenance activities or minor operational changes to the grade crossing traffic control system that do not have a negative impact on the overall operation of the traffic control system may be made without a review and determination by a Diagnostic Team.</span></p>
	</span>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">To stimulate effective responses from road users, these devices, systems, and practices should use the five basic considerations employed generally for traffic control devices and described fully in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A02">Section 1A.02</a>: design, placement, operation, maintenance, and uniformity.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A03_para08">08</span><span class="support">Many other details of <span class="text_deleted">highway-rail </span>grade crossing traffic control systems that are not set forth in Part 8 are contained in <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">the </span>publications <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">listed in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_deleted">11</span><span class="text_added">05</span></a>, including the <span class="text_added">latest version of the </span></span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">such as the </span>“<span class="text_deleted">2000 </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">2023 </span>AREMA Communications <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">&amp;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">and</span> Signals Manual” published by the American Railway Engineering <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">&amp;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">and</span> Maintenance-of-Way Association (AREMA)<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, the Third Edition of "Highway-Rail Crossing Handbook" published by the FHWA</span> and the <span class="text_deleted">2006 edition</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">latest version</span></span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">FRA, and the 2nd Edition</span> of “Preemption of Traffic Signals Near Railroad Crossings” published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE).</span></p>

    <h3 id="section8A04">Section <span class="text_deleted">8A.03</span><span class="text_added">8A.04</span> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Use of Standard Devices,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Traffic Control</span> Systems<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">, and Practices</span> at Highway-LRT Grade Crossings</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A04_para01">01</span><span class="support">The combination of devices selected or installed at a specific highway-LRT grade crossing is referred to as a <span class="text_added">"</span>Light Rail Transit Traffic Control System.<span class="text_added change_from_npa">"</span></span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted">
	<p><span class="support">Because of the large number of significant variables to be considered, no single standard system of traffic control devices is universally applicable for all highway-LRT grade crossings.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support">For the safety and integrity of operations by highway and LRT users, the highway agency with jurisdiction, the regulatory agency with statutory authority, if applicable, and the LRT authority jointly determine the need and selection of traffic control devices and the assignment of priority to LRT at a highway-LRT grade crossing.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A04_para02">02</span><span class="support">The normal rules of the road and traffic control priority identified in the “Uniform Vehicle Code” <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">and its successor documents </span></span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">(see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A06">Section 1A.06</a>) </span>govern the order assigned to the movement of vehicles at an intersection unless the local agency determines that it is appropriate to assign a higher priority to LRT<span class="text_added"> vehicles</span>. Examples of different types of LRT priority control include separate traffic control signal phases for LRT movements, restriction of movement of roadway vehicles in favor of LRT operations, and preemption of highway traffic signal control to accommodate LRT movements.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted">
	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="standard">Traffic control devices, systems, and practices shall be consistent with the design and application of the Standards contained in this Manual.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard">The traffic control devices, systems, and practices described in this Manual shall be used at all highway-LRT grade crossings.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard">Before any new highway-LRT grade crossing traffic control system is installed or before modifications are made to an existing system, approval shall be obtained from the highway agency with the jurisdictional and/or statutory authority, and from the LRT agency.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">To stimulate effective responses from road users, these devices, systems, and practices should use the five basic considerations employed generally for traffic control devices and described fully in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A02">Section 1A.02</a>: design, placement, operation, maintenance, and uniformity.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Many other details of highway-LRT grade crossing traffic control systems that are not set forth in <a href="part8_toc.html">Part 8</a> are contained in the publications listed in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A11">Section 1A.11</a>.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A04_para03">03</span><span class="standard">Highway-LRT grade crossings in semi-exclusive alignments <span class="text_added">outside of a roadway </span>shall be equipped with <span class="text_deleted">a combination of automatic gates and </span>flashing-light signals, <span class="text_added">with </span>or <span class="text_deleted">flashing-light signals only, or traffic control signals</span><span class="text_added">without automatic gates</span>, unless <span class="text_deleted">an engineering study indicates</span><span class="text_added">a Diagnostic Team determines</span> that the use of Crossbuck Assemblies, STOP signs, or YIELD signs alone would be adequate.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted">
	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="option">Highway-LRT grade crossings in mixed-use alignments may be equipped with traffic control signals unless an engineering study indicates that the use of Crossbuck Assemblies, STOP signs, or YIELD signs alone would be adequate.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A03_para13">13</span><span class="support"><a href="part8b.xhtml#section8B03">Sections 8B.03</a> and <a href="part8b.xhtml#section8B04">8B.04</a> contain provisions regarding the use and placement of Crossbuck signs and Crossbuck Assemblies. <a href="part8b.xhtml#section8B05">Section 8B.05</a> describes the appropriate conditions for the use of STOP or YIELD signs alone at a highway-LRT grade crossing. <a href="part8d.xhtml#section8C10">Sections 8C.10</a> and <a href="part8d.xhtml#section8C11">8C.11</a> contain provisions regarding the use of traffic control signals at highway-LRT grade crossings.</span></p>
	</span>

	<span class="text_added">
	<h3 id="section8A05">Section 8A.05 Engineering Studies at Grade Crossings</h3>
	</span>

	<p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span></span><span class="text_added"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A05_para01">01</span><span class="standard">The appropriate traffic control system to be used at a <span class="text_deleted">highway-rail </span>grade crossing <span class="text_deleted">should</span><span class="text_added">shall</span> be determined <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">by</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">based on</span> an engineering study <span class="text_added">conducted by a Diagnostic Team </span>involving <span class="text_deleted">both </span>the highway agency <span class="text_added">with jurisdiction, the regulatory agency with statutory authority (if applicable), </span>and the railroad company<span class="text_added"> and/or transit agency (as applicable)</span>.</span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A05_para02">02</span><span class="option">The regulatory agency with statutory authority (if applicable) may approve the grade crossing traffic control system.</span></p>
	</span></div>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><span class="change_noted">Added to improve consistency</span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A05_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Among the factors that should be considered in the determination by a Diagnostic Team of which traffic control devices would be appropriate to install at a grade crossing are road geometrics, stopping sight distance, clearing sight distance, the proximity of nearby roadway intersections (including the traffic control devices at the intersections), adjacent driveways, traffic volume across the grade crossing, extent of queuing upstream or downstream from the grade crossing, train volume, pedestrian <span class="text_added change_from_npa">and bicycle </span>volume<span class="text_added change_from_npa">s</span>, operation of passenger trains, presence of nearby passenger station stops, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">maximum allowable train speeds, </span>variable train speeds, accelerating and decelerating trains, multiple tracks, high-speed train operation, number of school buses or hazardous material haul vehicles, and the crash history at or near the location.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A05_para04">04</span><span class="option">The engineering study may include the Highway-Rail Intersection (HRI) components of the National Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) architecture, which is a USDOT accepted method for linking the highway, vehicles, and traffic management systems with rail operations and wayside equipment.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A05_para05">05</span><span class="support">More detail on Highway-Rail Intersection components is available from the USDOT’s Federal Railroad Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE, Washington, DC 20590, or www.fra.dot.gov.</span></p>

	<span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">The appropriate traffic control system to be used at a highway-LRT grade crossing should be determined by an engineering study conducted by the LRT or highway agency in cooperation with other appropriate State and local organizations.</span></p></span>

    <h3 id="section8A06">Section <span class="text_deleted">8A.04</span><span class="text_added">8A.06</span> Uniform Provisions</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A06_para01">01</span><span class="standard">All signs used in grade crossing traffic control systems shall be <span class="text_deleted">retroreflectorized</span><span class="text_added">retroreflective</span> or illuminated as described in <a href="part2a.xhtml#section2A21">Section 2A.<span class="text_deleted">07</span><span class="text_added">21</span></a> to show the same shape and similar color to an approaching road user during both day and night.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A06_para02">02</span><span class="standard">No sign or signal shall be located in the center of an undivided highway, unless it is crashworthy (breakaway, yielding, or shielded with a longitudinal barrier or crash cushion) or unless it is placed on a raised island.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A06_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Any signs or signals placed on a raised island in the center of an undivided highway should be installed with a clearance of at least 2 feet from the outer edge of the raised island to the nearest edge of the sign or signal, except as permitted in <a href="part2a.xhtml#section2A16">Section 2A.<span class="text_deleted">19</span><span class="text_added">16</span></a>.</span></p>

    <div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><p><span class="guidance">Where the distance between tracks, measured along the highway between the inside rails, exceeds 100 feet, additional signs or other appropriate traffic control devices should be used to inform approaching road users of the long distance to cross the tracks.</span></p></span></div>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A06_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Where a raised median is installed supplemental to an automatic gate to discourage road users from driving around a lowered gate, the Diagnostic Team should consider the length of the vehicle queues that typically form on the approach to the grade crossing when determining how far in advance of the grade crossing to extend the island.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A06_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">If the roadway at a grade crossing includes a two-way left-turn lane (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#section3B05">Section 3B.05</a>), the two-way left-turn lane should be discontinued in the immediate vicinity of the grade crossing by installing median islands, by designating the lane for left turns in one direction only, or by installing yellow diagonal markings in the lane (see <a href="part3b.xhtml#figure3B05">Figure 3B-5</a>). If yellow diagonal markings are used, the use of channelizing devices (see <a href="part3i.xhtml#section3I01">Section 3I.01</a>), such as supplemental tubular markers, should also be considered.</span></p>
	</span>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A06_para06">06</span><span class="option">If yellow diagonal markings are used, extending the automatic gate across the lane may be considered.</span></p>
	</span></div>

	<span class="text_added">
	<h3 id="section8A07">Section 8A.07 Minimum Track Clearance Distance<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> and Clear Storage Distance</span></h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A07_para01">01</span><span class="support">The upstream point of the minimum track clearance distance is determined in the following manner:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="support">
		<li>If an automatic gate is present on the approach, the upstream point is the portion of the automatic gate arm that is farthest from the nearest rail.</li>
		<li>If an automatic gate is not present on the approach, the upstream point is the portion of the stop line that is farthest from the nearest rail.</li>
		<li>If the roadway is not paved, the upstream point is the point that is farthest from the nearest rail that is 10 feet measured perpendicular from the nearest rail.</li>
	</ol>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A07_para02">02</span><span class="support">The downstream point of the minimum track clearance distance is 6 feet beyond the track(s) <span class="text_added change_from_npa">or the edge of the downstream highway-highway intersection, whichever is closer, and is </span>measured perpendicular to the farthest rail, along the center line or edge line of the highway, as appropriate, to obtain the longer distance. Where an Exit Gate system (see <a href="part8d.xhtml#section8D05">Section 8D.05</a>) is present, the downstream point is the point where the rear of the vehicle would be clear of the exit gate arm. In cases where the exit gate arm is not perpendicular to the highway, the distance is measured either along the center line or edge line of the highway, as appropriate, to obtain the longer distance.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A07_para03">03</span><span class="support">Where two adjacent grade crossings <span class="text_added change_from_npa">(see <a href="#section8A08">Section 8A.08</a>) </span>are located within 200 feet of each other as measured along the highway, the minimum track clearance <span class="text_added change_from_npa">distance </span>is measured from a point that is upstream of the first grade crossing to a point that is downstream from the second grade crossing.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A07_para04">04</span><span class="support">Where a highway-highway intersection is located beyond a grade crossing, the clear storage distance defines on a lane-by-lane basis the area of the roadway between the downstream point of the minimum track clearance distance and the intersection stop line, yield line, or normal stopping point on the highway.</span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A07_para05">05</span><span class="support">The Highway-Rail Crossing Handbook contains an illustration of the minimum track clearance distance and the clear storage distance.</span></p>
	</span></div>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A07_para06">06</span><span class="support">The minimum track clearance distance and the clear storage distance are used by the Diagnostic Team to determine the appropriate traffic control devices and/or roadway treatments to be used at the grade crossing, and to determine the queue start-up and queue clearance time necessary where a traffic signal or hybrid beacon is interconnected with a grade crossing active warning system.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section8A08">Section 8A.08 Adjacent Grade Crossings</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A08_para01">01</span><span class="support">Adjacent grade crossings sometimes exist within 200 feet of each other as measured along the highway<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> between the inside rails</span>. These closely-spaced grade crossings sometimes result from separate railroads or from a railroad and an LRT alignment operating in parallel corridors.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A08_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Where adjacent grade crossings are located within 200 feet of each other along the highway<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> as measured along the highway between the inside rails</span>, the Diagnostic Team should consider the possibility that rail traffic might arrive at a grade crossing when rail traffic is already occupying the adjacent grade crossing.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A08_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Where the <span class="text_added change_from_npa">shortest </span>distance between the tracks at adjacent grade crossings, measured along the highway between the inside rails, is 100 feet or less, the grade crossings should be treated as one individual grade crossing.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A08_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Where the <span class="text_added change_from_npa">shortest </span>distance between the tracks at adjacent grade crossings, measured along the highway between the inside rails, is more than 100 feet<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> and less than 200 feet</span>, additional signs or other appropriate traffic control devices should be used to inform approaching road users of the long distance to cross the tracks.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A08_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">Where active traffic control devices are installed between adjacent grade crossings that are <span class="text_added change_from_npa">more than 100 feet apart and </span>less than 200 feet apart<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> as measured along the highway between the inside rails</span>, the operation of the devices should provide additional time for vehicles to clear the extended minimum track clearance distance (see <a href="#section8A07">Section 8A.07</a>) that results from the closely-spaced grade crossings.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A08_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Where the <span class="text_added change_from_npa">shortest </span>distance between the tracks at adjacent grade crossings, measured along the highway between the inside rails, is more than 200 feet, the grade crossings should be treated as individual grade crossings and traffic control devices should be installed between the grade crossings.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A08_para07">07</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Part 3.1.11 of t</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">T</span>he "<span class="text_added change_from_npa">2023 </span>ARMEA Communication <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">&amp;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">and</span> Signals Manual" <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">(see Section 1A.05) </span>published by the American Railway Engineering <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">&amp;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">and</span> Maintenance-of-Way Association (AREMA) contains further information and recommendations about the location and operation active traffic control devices at adjacent grade crossings that are located within 200 feet of each other.</span></p>
	</span>

    <h3 id="section8A09">Section <span class="text_deleted">8A.05</span><span class="text_added">8A.09</span> Grade Crossing Elimination</h3>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A09_para01">01</span><span class="option">If a particular grade crossing appears to be redundant or unnecessary<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> for motor vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic</span>, an engineering study may be conducted to determine the costs and benefits of eliminating the crossing.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A09_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">If an engineering study is conducted, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">the costs associated with </span>any necessary improvements to adjacent grade crossings and the surrounding roadway network to accommodate diverted traffic should also be included in the analysis.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A09_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">If the conclusion of the engineering study is that the grade crossing should be eliminated, a Diagnostic Team should use the engineering study to determine the appropriate steps that need to be taken to accomplish the grade crossing elimination.</span></p>
	</span>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">Because grade crossings are a potential source of crashes and congestion, agencies should conduct engineering studies to determine the cost and benefits of eliminating these crossings.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="change_from_npa"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section8A09_para04">04</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">When</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Where</span> a grade crossing is eliminated, the traffic control devices for the crossing <span class="change_from_npa">shall</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">should</span></span> be removed<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, and shall be covered or turned from view in the interim period prior to removal</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added change_from_npa"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section8A09_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">If the existing traffic control devices at a multiple-track grade crossing become improperly placed or <span class="text_deleted">inaccurate</span><span class="text_added">are no longer applicable</span> because of the removal of some of the tracks, the existing devices <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be relocated and/or modified.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">Any grade crossing that cannot be justified should be eliminated.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A09_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Where a roadway is removed from a grade crossing, the roadway approaches in the railroad or LRT right-of-way should also be removed and appropriate signs and object markers should be placed at the roadway end in accordance with <a href="part2c.xhtml#section2C73">Section 2C.<span class="text_deleted">66</span><span class="text_added">73</span></a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A09_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">Where a railroad or LRT is eliminated at a grade crossing, the tracks should be removed or <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">covered</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">paved over</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A09_para08">08</span><span class="option">Based on engineering judgment, the TRACKS OUT OF SERVICE (R8-9) sign (see <a href="part8b.xhtml#figure8B01">Figure 8B-1</a>) may be temporarily installed until the tracks are removed or covered. The length of time before the tracks will be removed or covered may be considered in making the decision as to whether to install the sign.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section8A10">Section <span class="text_deleted">8A.06</span><span class="text_added">8A.10</span> Illumination at Grade Crossings</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A10_para01">01</span><span class="support">Illumination is sometimes installed at or adjacent to a grade crossing in order to provide better nighttime visibility of trains or LRT equipment and the grade crossing (for example, where a substantial amount of railroad or LRT operations are conducted at night, where grade crossings are blocked for extended periods of time, or where crash history indicates that road users experience difficulty in seeing trains or LRT equipment or traffic control devices during hours of darkness).</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A10_para02">02</span><span class="support">Recommended types and locations of luminaires for illuminating grade crossings are contained in the American National Standards Institute’s <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">(ANSI) </span>“<span class="text_added change_from_npa">ANSI/IES RP-8-22, Recommended </span>Practice<span class="text_added change_from_npa">:</span> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">for Roadway </span>Lighting <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">RP-8</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Roadway and Parking Facilities</span>,” which is available from the Illuminating Engineering Society<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> (see Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span>)</span>.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section8A11">Section <span class="text_deleted">8A.07</span><span class="text_added">8A.11</span> Quiet Zone Treatments at Highway-Rail Grade Crossings</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A11_para01">01</span><span class="support">49 CFR Part 222 (Use of Locomotive Horns at Highway-Rail Grade Crossings; Final Rule) prescribes Quiet Zone requirements and treatments.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A11_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Any traffic control device and its application where used as part of a Quiet Zone shall comply with all applicable provisions of the MUTCD.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section8A12">Section <span class="text_deleted">8C.12</span><span class="text_added">8A.12</span> Grade Crossings Within or In Close Proximity to Circular Intersections</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A12_para01">01</span><span class="support">At circular intersections, such as roundabouts and traffic circles, that include or are within close proximity to a grade crossing, a queue of vehicular traffic could cause <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">highway</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">motor</span> vehicles to stop on the grade crossing.</span></p>

    <p><span class="change_from_npa"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A12_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Where circular intersections include or are within 200 feet of a grade crossing, an engineering study <span class="change_from_npa">shall</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">should</span></span> be made to determine if queuing could impact the grade crossing.<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> If traffic queues impact the grade crossing, provisions <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be made to clear highway traffic from the grade crossing prior to the arrival of rail traffic.</span></span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added change_from_npa">
	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A12_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The Diagnostic Team should review the findings of the engineering study and determine the appropriate measures to clear highway traffic from the grade crossing prior to the arrival of rail traffic.</span></p>
	</span></div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A12_para04">04</span><span class="support">Among the actions that can be taken to keep the grade crossing clear of traffic or to clear traffic from the grade crossing prior to the arrival of rail traffic are the following:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="support">
      <span class="text_deleted">
		<div>Elimination of the circular intersection,</div>

      	<div>Geometric design revisions,</div>
	</span>
      <li>Grade crossing regulatory and warning devices<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">;</span></li>

      <li>Highway traffic signals<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">;</span></li>

      <li>Traffic metering devices<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">;</span></li>

      <li>Activated signs<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">;</span><span class="text_deleted"> or</span></li>

	<span class="text_added"><li>Geometric design revisions, including reconstruction or elimination of the circular intersection<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">;</span> or</li></span>

      <li>A combination of these or other actions.</li>
    </ol>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
	<h3>Section 8A.13 Busway Grade Crossings</h3>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">A busway can be operated either as an exclusive or as a semi-exclusive alignment. An exclusive alignment does not have grade crossings and is not further addressed in Part 8.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support">Because the design and operation of a busway in a semi-exclusive alignment is similar to light-rail transit in a semi-exclusive alignment, all of the provisions in Part 8 that pertain to the traffic control devices used at LRT grade crossings in semi-exclusive alignments also pertain to the traffic control devices used at busway grade crossings in semi-exclusive alignments unless otherwise specified in this Manual. The primary difference between a busway and an LRT system is that a busway is used by transit vehicles with rubber tires on pavement and an LRT system is used by transit vehicles with steel wheels that operate on rails.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support">Busway grade crossings can occur at intersections or at midblock locations, including public and private driveways.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">Highway-busway grade crossings should be equipped with an active busway grade crossing warning system unless an engineering study indicates that the use of STOP signs or YIELD signs along would be adequate.</span></p>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="standard">Where a busway grade crossing and a railroad or LRT grade crossing are adjacent to one another such that the active railroad or LRT grade crossing warning system and the active busway grade crossing warning system share common grade crossing traffic control devices, the warning system for the railroad or LRT grade crossing shall control the operation of all grade crossing traffic control devices, and the warning system for the busway shall be interconnected with the active railroad or LRT grade crossing warning system to provide notification of an approaching bus to the active grade crossing warning system.</span></p>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="option">Automatic gates may be used at highway-busway grade crossings.</span></p>

	<p><span class="option">DO NOT BLOCK INTERSECTION (R10-7) signs (see Section 2B.63) may be installed at highway-busway grade crossings.</span></p>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="standard">Busway automatic gates, if used, shall comply with the provisions set forth in Section 8D.03 for automatic gates and shall be standard railroad size, striped with 16-inch alternate vertical, fully retroreflective red and white stripes. Flashing red lights shall be included on the gate arm and they shall only be operated if the gate is closed or in the process of being opened or closed. In the horizontal position, the top of the gate shall be approximately 4 feet above the pavement.</span></p>

	<p><span class="standard">Busway automatic entrance gates shall be designed to fail-safe in the down position unless other provisions, such as activated blank-out signs or LRT Signals, are used to ensure the bus operator is alerted to slow down and proceed with caution when gates are malfunctioning.</span></p>

	<p><span class="standard">Four-Quadrant Busway automatic gates shall comply with the provisions set forth in Section 8D.05.</span></p>

	<p><span class="standard">If an active busway grade crossing warning system is used at a pathway-busway or sidewalk-busway grade crossing, a bell or other audible warning device shall be provided for each pathway or sidewalk approach to the crossing.</span></p>

	<p><span class="standard">BUSWAY CROSSING (W10-21) signs with SIGNAL HEAD (S10-21aP) supplemental plaques shall be used in advance of busway crossings.</span></p>

	<p><span class="standard">On paved roadways, pavement markings in advance of a busway grade crossing shall consist of a word message BUS XING and a no-passing zone marking (on two-lane, two-way highways with center line markings in compliance with Section 3B.01). The symbol X and the transverse lines used in advance of a railroad or LRT grade crossing shall ont be used for a busway grade crossing.</span></p>
	</span></span></div>

    <h3 id="section8A13">Section <span class="text_deleted">8A.08</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">8A.14</span></span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">8A.14</span> Temporary Traffic Control Zones</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A13_para01">01</span><span class="support">Temporary traffic control planning provides for continuity of operations (such as movement of <span class="text_added change_from_npa">motor vehicle </span>traffic, pedestrians<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> and <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">bicycles</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">bicyclists</span>, transit operations, and access to property/utilities) when the normal function of a roadway at a grade crossing is suspended because of temporary traffic control operations.<span class="text_added"> Temporary traffic control planning is also needed when traffic is detoured over an existing <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">passive </span>grade crossing.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A13_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Traffic controls for temporary traffic control zones that include grade crossings shall be as <span class="text_deleted">outlined</span><span class="text_added">provided</span> in Part 6.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="guidance">When a grade crossing exists either within or in the vicinity of a temporary traffic control zone, lane restrictions, flagging (see <a href="part6d.xhtml">Chapter 6<span class="text_deleted">E</span><span class="text_added">D</span></a>), or other operations <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> not be performed in a manner that would cause highway vehicles to stop on the <span class="text_deleted">railroad or LRT </span>tracks, unless a flagger or uniformed law enforcement officer is provided at the grade crossing to minimize the possibility of highway vehicles stopping on the tracks, even if automatic warning devices are in place.</span></span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A14_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">When a temporary traffic control zone extends over a<span class="text_added change_from_npa">n active</span> grade crossing <span class="text_added change_from_npa">(see <a href="part6n.xhtml#section6N17">Section 6N.17</a>), and where the direction of traffic in any lane is reversed over the grade crossing, the railroad company or transit agency should be part of the temporary traffic control planning process</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">equipped with automatic gates and either one-lane two-way or reversible lane operation is used, any improperly located gate arms that might cause vehicles to stop within the minimum track clearance distance (see Section 8A.07) should be removed</span>. <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">At locations where a gate arm is removed</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Where a grade crossing warning system is not modified to support the temporary traffic control operation</span>, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">a railroad company or transit agency employee serving as a flagger and </span>at least one uniformed law enforcement officer should be in place at all times that rail traffic might approach or occupy the grade crossing.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section8A14_para04">04</span><span class="guidance"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">When</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Where</span> traffic is detoured over an existing passive grade crossing, a temporary traffic control plan (see <a href="part6b.xhtml#section6B01">Section 6B.01</a>) should be prepared.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section8A14_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">Public and private agencies, <span class="text_deleted">including </span>emergency services, businesses, and railroad <span class="text_deleted">or LRT </span>companies<span class="text_added"> or transit agencies</span><span class="text_deleted">,</span> should meet to plan appropriate traffic detours and the necessary signing, marking, <span class="text_added">signalization, </span>and flagging requirements for operations during temporary traffic control zone activities<span class="text_added"> or during the period when traffic is being detoured over an existing passive grade crossing</span>. Consideration should be given to the length of time that the grade crossing is to be closed, <span class="text_added">the length of time that a detour is to be in place, </span>the type of rail or LRT and highway traffic affected, the time of day, and the materials and techniques of repair.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A14_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">The agencies responsible for the operation of the LRT and highway should be contacted when the initial planning begins for any temporary traffic control zone that might directly or indirectly influence the flow of traffic on <span class="text_deleted">mixed-use </span>facilities where LRT <span class="text_added">vehicles </span><span class="text_deleted">and road users </span>operate<span class="text_added"> on a mixed-use alignment</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section8A14_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">Temporary traffic control operations should minimize the inconvenience, delay, and crash potential to affected traffic. Prior notice should be given to affected public or private agencies, emergency services, businesses, railroad <span class="text_deleted">or LRT </span>companies<span class="text_added"> or transit agencies</span>, and road users before the free movement of road users or rail traffic is infringed upon or blocked.</span></p>

    <div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><p><span class="guidance">Temporary traffic control zone activities should not be permitted to extensively prolong the closing of <span class="text_deleted">the</span><span class="text_added">a</span> grade crossing.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance">The width, grade, alignment, and riding quality of the highway surface at a grade crossing should, at a minimum, be restored to correspond with the quality of the approaches to the grade crossing.</span></p></span></div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section8A14_para08">08</span><span class="support"><a href="part6n.xhtml#section6N17">Section <span class="text_deleted">6G.18</span><span class="text_added">6N.17</span></a> contains additional information regarding temporary traffic control zones in the vicinity of grade crossings, and <a href="part6p.xhtml#figure6P46">Figure 6<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">H</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">P</span>-46</a> shows an example of a typical situation that might be encountered.</span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>