<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 4M - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter <span class="text_deleted">4G</span><span class="text_added">4M</span>. Traffic Control Signals <span class="text_deleted">and Hybrid Beacons </span>for Emergency-Vehicle Access</h1>

    <h3 id="section4M01">Section <span class="text_deleted">4G.01</span><span class="text_added">4M.01</span> Application of Emergency-Vehicle Traffic Control Signals<span class="text_deleted"> and Hybrid Beacons</span></h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4M01_para01">01</span><span class="support">An emergency-vehicle traffic control signal is a special traffic control signal that <span class="text_deleted">assigns the right-of-way to</span><span class="text_added">directs all conflicting traffic to stop in order to permit the driver of</span> an authorized emergency vehicle<span class="text_added"> to proceed into the roadway or intersection</span>. </span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4M01_para02">02</span><span class="option">An emergency-vehicle traffic control signal may be installed at a location that does not meet other traffic signal warrants such as at an intersection or other location to permit direct access from a building housing the emergency vehicle.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4M01_para03">03</span><span class="option">An emergency-vehicle hybrid beacon may be installed instead of an emergency-vehicle traffic control signal under conditions described in <a href="part4n.xhtml#section4N01">Section <span class="text_deleted">4G.04</span><span class="text_added">4N.01</span></a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4M01_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">If a traffic control signal is not justified under the signal warrants of <a href="part4c.xhtml">Chapter 4C</a> and if gaps in traffic are not adequate to permit the timely entrance of emergency vehicles, or the stopping sight distance for vehicles approaching on the major street is insufficient for emergency vehicles, installing an emergency-vehicle traffic control signal should be considered. If one of the signal warrants of <a href="part4c.xhtml">Chapter 4C</a> is met and a traffic control signal is justified by an engineering study, and if a decision is made to install a traffic control signal, it should be installed based upon the provisions of <a href="part4d.xhtml">Chapter<span class="text_added">s</span> 4D</a><span class="text_added">through <a href="part4i.xhtml">4I</a></span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4M01_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">The sight distance determination should be based on the location of the visibility obstruction for the critical approach lane for each street or drive and the posted or statutory speed limit or 85th-percentile speed on the major street, whichever is higher.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4M02">Section <span class="text_deleted">4G.02</span><span class="text_added">4M.02</span> Design of Emergency-Vehicle Traffic Control Signals</h3>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4M02_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Except as otherwise provided in this Section, an emergency-vehicle traffic control signal shall meet the requirements of this Manual.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4M02_para02">02</span><span class="standard">An Emergency Vehicle (W11-8) sign (see <a href="part2c.xhtml#section2C54">Section 2C.<span class="text_added">54</span><span class="text_deleted">49</span></a>) with an EMERGENCY SIGNAL AHEAD (W11-12P) supplemental plaque shall be placed in advance of all emergency-vehicle traffic control signals. If a <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">w</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">W</span>arning <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">b</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">B</span>eacon is installed to supplement the W11-8 sign, the design and location of the beacon shall comply with the Standards of <a href="part4s.xhtml#section4S01">Sections <span class="text_deleted">4L</span><span class="text_added">4S</span>.01</a> and <a href="part4s.xhtml#section4S03"><span class="text_deleted">4L</span><span class="text_added">4S</span>.03</a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4M02_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">At least one of the two required signal faces for each approach on the major street should be located over the roadway.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4M02_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">The following size signal indications should be used for emergency-vehicle traffic control signals: 12-inch diameter for steady red and steady yellow circular signal indications and any arrow indications, and 8-inch diameter for green or flashing yellow circular signal indications.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4M02_para05">05</span><span class="standard">An EMERGENCY SIGNAL (R10-13) sign <span class="text_added">(see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B63">Section 2B.63</a>)</span> shall be <span class="text_deleted">mounted adjacent to a signal face on</span><span class="text_added">installed facing</span> each major<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">-</span>street approach<span class="text_deleted"> (see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B53">Section 2B.53</a>)</span>.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4M02_para06">06</span><span class="standard">If an overhead signal face is provided, the EMERGENCY SIGNAL sign shall be mounted adjacent to the overhead signal face.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4M02_para07">07</span><span class="option">An approach that only serves emergency vehicles may be provided with only one signal face consisting of one or more signal sections.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4M02_para07">07</span><span class="option">Besides using an 8-inch diameter signal indication, other appropriate means to reduce the flashing yellow light output may be used.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4M03">Section <span class="text_deleted">4G.03</span><span class="text_added">4M.03</span> Operation of Emergency-Vehicle Traffic Control Signals</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>433. In Section 4M.03 (existing Section 4G.03) Operation of Emergency- Vehicle Traffic Control Signals, FHWA proposes to change P3 and P4 from Standard to Guidance to provide agencies additional flexibility in the operation of emergency-vehicle traffic control signals and warning beacons.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The changes are adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4M03_para01">01</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">Right-of-way</span><span class="text_added">Green signal indications</span> for emergency vehicles at signalized locations operating in the steady (stop-and-go) mode shall be obtained as provided in <a href="part4f.xhtml#section4F19">Section <span class="text_deleted">4D.27</span><span class="text_added">4F/19</span></a>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4M03_para02">02</span><span class="standard">As a minimum, the signal indications, sequence, and manner of operation of an emergency-vehicle traffic control signal installed at a midblock location shall be as follows:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>The signal indication, between emergency-vehicle actuations, shall be either green or flashing yellow. If the flashing yellow signal indication is used instead of the green signal indication, it shall be displayed in the normal position of the green signal indication, while the steady red and steady yellow signal indications shall be displayed in their normal positions.</li>

      <li>When an emergency-vehicle actuation occurs, a steady yellow change interval followed by a steady red interval shall be displayed to traffic on the major street.</li>

      <li>A yellow change interval is not required following the green interval for the emergency-vehicle driveway.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section4M03_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Emergency-vehicle traffic control signals located at intersections <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> either be operated in the flashing mode <span class="text_added change_from_npa">(see Sections <a href="part4g.xhtml#section4G01">4G.01</a> and <a href="part4g.xhtml#section4G03">4G.03</a>) </span>between emergency-vehicle actuations<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> (see <a href="part4d.xhtml#section4D28">Sections 4D.28 </a>and <a href="part4d.xhtml#section4D30">4D.30</a>)</span> or be full-actuated or semi-actuated to accommodate normal vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the streets.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4M03_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Warning beacons, if used with an emergency-vehicle traffic control signal, <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be flashed only:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>For an appropriate time in advance of and during the steady yellow change interval for the major street<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> and</li>

      <li>During the steady red interval for the major street.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/></span> <span class="paranum" id="section4M03_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">The duration of the steady red interval for traffic on the major street should be determined by on-site test-run time studies, but should not exceed 1.5 times the time required for the emergency vehicle to clear the path of conflicting vehicles.</span></p>

    <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4M03_para06">06</span><span class="option">An emergency-vehicle traffic control signal sequence may be initiated manually from a local control point such as a fire station or law enforcement headquarters or from an emergency vehicle equipped for remote operation of the signal.</span></p>

  </div>
</body>
</html>