<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 5A - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content" class="text_added">

	<div class="npa">
	<p>448. As part of the relocation of material related to low- volume roads to other parts within the Manual, FHWA proposes to provide content and retitle Part 5 Automated Vehicles. FHWA proposes all new content for this part.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">Part 5 is retitled “Traffic Control Device Considerations for Automated Vehicles” in the final rule. The title change emphasizes that this part provides general considerations for agencies in relation to preparing for automated vehicle technology.</p>

	<p>The purpose of this new part is to provide agencies with general considerations for vehicle automation as they assess their infrastructure needs, prepare their roadways for automated vehicle (AV) technologies, and to support the safe deployment of AVs.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">See Preamble of Federal Register for discussion of this new Part.</p>
	</div>

	<div class="fr">
	<p>Part 5 in the NPA was retitled for Automated Vehicles (AV) and included all new content. (In the NPA, the provisions for Low-Volume Roads in Part 5 of the 2009 MUTCD were proposed for integration into the other parts of the MUTCD.) The purpose of this new part is to provide agencies with general considerations for vehicle automation as they assess their infrastructure needs, prepare their roadways for AV technologies, and to support the safe integration of AVs. The NPA proposed two chapters for Part 5, with a third chapter reserved for future considerations. The first chapter, Chapter 5A, covered the purpose and scope, the definition of terms and other general information on design and use considerations for roadways intended to accommodate AVs operations. Chapter 5B “Provisions for Traffic Control Devices” contains six sections providing provisions beneficial to AV operations on signs, markings, traffic signals, and temporary traffic control, as well as traffic control at railroad and light rail transit grade crossings, and on bicycle facilities.</p>

	<p>The overarching comments on this Part ranged from general support to concerns it will create a cost burden on transportation agencies and suggesting the removal of the Part. Other comments proposed moving the elements of Part 5 directly into the applicable chapters of the MUTCD (Parts 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, and 9). Comments in opposition to Part 5 as a whole or recommending the provisions in Part 5 simply be moved into the other chapters of the MUTCD, indicate confusion by commenters on the intended purpose of adding Part 5 to the MUTCD. The intended purpose of Part 5 is to identify traffic control device considerations for AVs operations on roadways specifically being designed to accommodate these vehicles.</p>

	<p>There were also comments on the technical basis of some provisions. Some commenters questioned the need for a prescribed light-emitting diode (LED) refresh rate for electronic message signs and traffic signals, as well as graphical markings on signs intended to be recognizable by vision-based driving automation systems to enhance sign recognition by these systems. Also, there were comments received on the proposed Standard and Guidance statements in Section 5B.04 that described the use and removal of pavement markings in work zones. Commenters noted that the provisions in this section were redundant or in conflict with similar provisions in Chapter 6J of the Manual.</p>

	<p>The FHWA adopts the new Part 5 with modified Support language emphasizing that Part 5 contains provisions that are exclusively for those agencies seeking to better accommodate driving automation systems to support AVs, and therefore are not specifically for consideration on other roadways. This change is done to address the confusion suggesting the provision in this Part will necessarily increase agency costs. In alignment with this change, the title is changed to “Traffic Control Device Considerations for Automated Vehicles” to more accurately reflect the contents of this new Part.</p>

	<p>To address a safety concern of a technology brought up by commenters that could negatively impact recognition and legibility of signs by human drivers, FHWA adds a Standard stating that when scanning graphics of any type are used on a sign for support of driving automation systems, the scanning graphics shall not be visible to the human eye and the sign shall have no apparent loss of resolution or recognition to road users. Also, in response to comments, the final rule deletes specifications regarding refresh rates and instead indicates that agencies should consider the refresh rate of LEDs on CMS. This language will allow agencies to use the refresh rate that is most appropriate for the prevailing driving automation systems technologies as this technology advances.</p>

	<p>Also, in response to comments, sections within Chapter 5B are restructured to more clearly state the specific traffic control device provisions. Further, in response to comments, the proposed Standards in Section 5B.04 regarding the use and removal of pavement markings in work zones are removed in this final rule, as they are redundant to similar provisions in Chapter 6J. Two new Support statements are added that reference the appropriate provisions in Sections 6J.01 and 6J.02 regarding the use and removal of pavement markings in work zones. The proposed Standard requiring the removing or obliterating pavement markings that are no longer applicable as soon as practicable is changed to Guidance to be consistent with similar provisions in Section 6J.01. Also, an additional Support statement is added that emphasizes the potential for misinterpretation by driving automation systems of pavement markings not fully removed or removed in a manner that causes pavement scarring, which can facilitate erroneous vehicle positioning in work zones. The new Part 5 addresses the requirement in BIL to update the MUTCD for the safe integration of AVs onto public streets.</p>
	</div>

    <h1>Chapter 5A. General</h1>

    <h3 id="section5A01">Section 5A.01 <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Purpose and </span>Scope<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> and Purpose</span></h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>449. FHWA proposes a new “Section 5A.01 Purpose and Scope” which contains a Support statement with general information about AV technologies, the MUTCD, and the purpose of the new part.</p>
	
	<p class="fr-disp">New Section 5A.01 is adopted but retitled as “Scope and Purpose” and with revised and expanded Support provisions based on comments.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A01_para01">01</span><span class="support">The <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">purpose</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">scope of the provisions</span> of this <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Chapter </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Part are intended for consideration of traffic control devices that are specifically being designed to accommodate automated vehicles capable of performing partial or full real-time operational functions in general traffic on a sustained basis. This Part does not require agencies to use these provisions in their accommodation of automated vehicles on their roadways. Rather, the purpose of these provisions </span>is to provide agencies with general considerations <span class="text_added change_from_npa">and guidance </span>for <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">vehicle automation as they assess their infrastructure needs, prepare their roadways for automated vehicle (AV) technologies, and to support the safe deployment of automated vehicle technology</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">traffic control devices that can be more helpful in the accommodation of such vehicles, while at the same time being more beneficial to road users</span>.</span></p>	

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A01_para02">02</span><span class="support">It is important for early implementers of automated vehicles to understand the ramifications of traffic control devices in a mixed fleet environment and to consider the needs of both human and machine<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">-</span>led road users. Partial automation technologies are already commercially available in the vehicle fleet and are operating under current infrastructure conditions. The overall effectiveness of the automation is impacted by the uniformity and consistent application of the highway infrastructure, including traffic control devices.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A01_para03">03</span><span class="support">This Chapter provides an overview of foundational <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">AV technology</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation system (see definition in <a href ="#section5A03">Section 5A.03</a>)</span> terminology, key principles, considerations for traffic control device selection, and topics for agencies to consider. The MUTCD does not address <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">standardizing several areas that might be important to AV technologies such as</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">standardization of</span> digital infrastructure, geometric road design, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">setting</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">traffic control device </span> maintenance levels<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> for all traffic control devices</span>, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">and setting </span>minimum <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">condition levels for paving materials</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">pavement conditions, or other items that might be important for safe and effective operation of driving automation system technologies</span>.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section5A02">Section 5A.02 Overview of Connected and Automated Vehicles</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>450. In new “Section 5A.02 Overview of Connected and Automated Vehicles,” FHWA proposes to include a Support statement describing various types of AV technology and sensors used by AVs.</p>
	
	<p class="fr-disp">New Section 5A.02 is adopted but with revised and expanded Support provisions based on comments.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A02_para01">01</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">AV</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Driving automation system</span> technology automates some or all aspects of the driving tasks to assist or replace the human <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">vehicle operator</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driver and can include driver assistance technology generally known as advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS)</span>. <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Automated vehicle features may include adaptive cruise control, adaptive headlights, automatic emergency braking, lane tracking assist, or other technology based features used to control some or all aspects of the vehicle. </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Automated vehicles (</span>AVs<span class="text_added change_from_npa">)</span> are vehicles in which at least one element of vehicle control (<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">e.g.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">such as</span> steering, speed control, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">or </span>braking) occurs without direct <span class="text_added change_from_npa">human </span>driver input. AVs <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">work</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">function</span> by gathering information from a suite of sensors<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> that can include, but are not limited to</span>:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="support">
	<li>Cameras;</li>
	<li>Radar;</li>
	<li>Light detection and ranging (LiDAR);</li>
	<li>Ultrasonic; and</li>
	<li>Infrared.</li>
	</ol>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A02_para02">02</span><span class="support">AVs <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">may</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">can</span> combine sensor data with other inputs including detailed map data and information from other connected vehicles or infrastructure. AVs <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">may</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">might</span> be able to detect and classify objects in their surroundings and <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">may</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">might</span> predict how they are likely to behave.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A02_para03">03</span><span class="support">Connected vehicle technology enables cars, buses, trucks, trains, roads<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> and roadside infrastructure, as well as other devices such as cellular telephones, to communicate with one another. <span class="text_added change_from_npa">Connected vehicle technology enabling vehicles to communicate with each other is known as vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V). Connected vehicle technology enabling vehicles to communicate with infrastructure is known as vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I). </span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">This</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Connected vehicle</span> technology enables <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">every</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">equipped</span> vehicle<span class="text_added change_from_npa">s</span> on the road to be aware of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">where</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">the location and status of</span> other nearby <span class="text_added change_from_npa">equipped </span>vehicles <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">are</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">or devices</span>. <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Drivers would</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Road users could</span> receive notifications and alerts of dangerous situations, such as a vehicle <span class="text_added change_from_npa">that is </span>about to run a red traffic signal as it nears an intersection<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> or an oncoming car, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">that is </span>out of sight beyond a curve<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span> swerving into the opposing lane to avoid an object on the road.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section5A03">Section 5A.03 Definitions and Terms</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>451. In new “Section 5A.03 Definition of Terms,” FHWA proposes to include a Support statement with several definitions	for terms used  extensively	in AV technology. The definitions proposed are summarized from those found in the Society of Automotive	 Engineers Standard SAE J3016 (<a href ="https://www.sae.org/news/2019/01/sae-updates-j3016-automated-driving-graphic">https://www.sae.org/news/2019/01/sae-updates-j3016-automated-driving-graphic</a>).	 The	 proposed terms	include:	 Automated Driving Systems, Advanced Driver Assistance Systems, Automation Levels, Cooperative Automation, Driving Automation Systems (DAS), Dynamic Driving Task,	and Operational Design Domain.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">New Section 5A.03 is adopted but with revised and expanded Support provisions based on comments.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A03_para01">01</span><span class="support">The <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">following </span>definitions and terms<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> shown in Items A through G below</span>, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">which are </span>found in the Society of Automotive Engineers standard SAE J3016 and other sources, are used extensively in automated vehicle technology. Their definitions<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, which</span> are summarized <span class="text_added change_from_npa">below </span>for reference and for use with the provisions of this Manual<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, are as follows</span>:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="support">
	<li>Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) – <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">are e</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">E</span>lectronic systems that aid a vehicle driver with one or more driving tasks while driving. They are intended to increase safe operation of a vehicle and include<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span> applications such as automatic braking, lane keep<span class="text_added change_from_npa">ing</span> assistance, adaptive cruise control, and others.</li>
	<li>Automated Driving Systems (ADS) - The hardware and software that are collectively capable of performing the entire <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">d</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">D</span>ynamic <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">d</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">D</span>riving <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">t</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">T</span>ask (DDT) on a sustained basis, regardless of whether it is limited to a specific <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">o</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">O</span>perational <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">d</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">D</span>esign <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">d</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">D</span>omain (ODD); this term is used specifically to describe a <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">l</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">L</span>evel 3, 4, or 5 driving automation system (DAS).</li>
	<li>Automation levels:<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> The levels of automation that are described in <a href ="#table5A01">Table 5A-1</a>.</span>
	<div class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><ol type="1" class="support">
		<li>Level 0 - The full-time performance by the human driver of all aspects of the DDT, even when enhanced by warning or intervention systems.</li>
		<li>Level 1 - The driving mode specific execution by a driver assistance system of either steering or acceleration/deceleration using information about the driving environment and with the expectation that the human driver performs all remaining aspects of the DDT.</li>
		<li>Level 2 - The driving mode specific execution by one or more driver assistance systems of both steering or acceleration/deceleration using information about the driving environment and with the expectation that the human driver performs all remaining aspects of the DDT.</li>
		<li>Level 3 - The driving mode specific performance by an ADS of all aspects of the DDT with the expectation that the human driver will respond appropriately to a request to intervene.</li>
		<li>Level 4 - The driving mode specific performance by an ADS of all aspects of the DDT, even if a human driver does not respond appropriately to a request to intervene.</li>
		<li>Level 5 - The full-time performance by an ADS of all aspects of the DDT under all roadway and environmental conditions that can be managed by a human driver.</li>
	</ol></div>
	</li>
	
	<li>Cooperative Automation – <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">t</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">T</span>echnology that enables communication with other vehicles and the infrastructure to coordinate automated vehicle operation.</li>
	<li><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Driving Automation System</span> - The hardware and software that are collectively capable of performing part or all of the DDT on a sustained basis; this term is used generically to describe any system capable of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">l</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">L</span>evel<span class="text_added change_from_npa">s</span> 1<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">-</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> thorough </span>5 driving automation.</li>
	<li><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Dynamic Driving Task (</span>DDT<span class="text_added change_from_npa">)</span> - All of the real-time operational and tactical functions required to operate a vehicle in on<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> </span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">-</span>road traffic, excluding the strategic functions such as trip scheduling and selection of destinations and waypoints.</li>
	<li><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Operational Design Domain (</span>ODD<span class="text_added change_from_npa">)</span> - Operating conditions under which a given DAS or feature thereof is specifically designed to function, including, but not limited to, environmental, geographical, and time-of-day restrictions, and/or the requisite presence or absence of certain traffic or roadway characteristics.</li>
	</ol>

	<div class="text_added change_from_npa">
	<table id="table5A01" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="2" width="100%">
      <caption>Table 5A-1. Automation Levels</caption>

      <thead>
        <tr align="center" bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
        		<th valign="middle">Automation Level</th>
			<th valign="middle">Description</th>
          	<th valign="middle">Automation Category</th>
			<th valign="middle">Automation Type</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody>
        <tr>
          	<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">Level 0</td>
			<td align="left" valign="middle">The full-time performance by the human driver in all aspects of the Dynamic Driving Task, even when enhanced by warning or momentary intervention systems.</td>
			<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">None*</td>
			<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">None</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          	<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">Level 1</td>
			<td align="left" valign="middle">The driving mode specific execution by a sustained driver assistance system of either steering or acceleration/deceleration using information about the driving environment and with the expectation that the human driver performs all remaining aspects of the Dynamic Driving Task.</td>
			<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;" rowspan="2">Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS)</td>
			<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;" rowspan="5">Driving Automation System</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          	<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">Level 2</td>
			<td align="left" valign="middle">The driving mode specific execution by one or more sustained driver assistance systems of both steering and acceleration/deceleration using information about the driving environment and with the expectation that the human driver performs all remaining aspects of the Dynamic Driving Task.</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          	<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">Level 3</td>
			<td align="left" valign="middle">The driving mode specific sustained performance by an ADS of all aspects of the Dynamic Driving Task within a given ODD with the expectation that the human driver will respond appropriately to a request to intervene.</td>
			<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;" rowspan="3">Automated Driving System (ADS)</td>
        </tr>

        	<tr>
          	<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">Level 4</td>
			<td align="left" valign="middle">The driving mode specific sustained performance by an ADS of all aspects of the Dynamic Driving Task, even if a human driver does not respond appropriately to a request to intervene.</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          	<td align="center" valign="middle" style="font-weight: bold;">Level 5</td>
			<td align="left" valign="middle">The full-time sustained performance by an ADS of all aspects of the Dynamic Driving Task under all roadway and environmental conditions that can be managed by a human driver.</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

	<div class="tablenote">
	<p>*NOTE: Level 0 might include some ADAS features, but they are considered to be warning or momentary intervention systems at this level.</p>
	</div>
	</div>

	<h3 id="section5A04">Section 5A.04 Traffic Control Device Design and Use Considerations</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>In new “Section 5A.04 Traffic Control Device and Use Considerations,” FHWA proposes a Support statement that describes the challenges related to the interaction between traffic control devices and DAS.</p>
	<p>FHWA also proposes to include a Guidance statement recommending agencies adopt maintenance policies or practices that consider both the human vehicle operator and DAS technology needs, and to use engineering judgment to determine traffic control device selection and placement with similar consideration.</p>
	<p>FHWA also proposes Support and Guidance statements regarding the fundamental principles and considerations to be applied in evaluating traffic control devices and other maintenance to support of AV technologies during maintenance and infrastructure improvements.</p>

	<p class="fr-disp">New Section 5A.04 is adopted but with revised and updated Support and Guidance provisions based on comments.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para01">01</span><span class="support">The interaction of traffic control devices with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation systems</span> can create many challenges for agencies in determining traffic control device selection and application. The lack of tolerance of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation systems</span> for non-uniformity in traffic control device design and application is a limiting factor of current <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation system</span> sophistication<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">, i.e. DAS has</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">. This is because driver automation systems have a</span> limited ability to interpolate across gaps in traffic control device cues to the vehicle in the following <span class="text_added change_from_npa">types of </span>situations:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="support">
		<li>The <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS technologies</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation system technology's</span> ability to adapt to existing traffic control device design and typical quality, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">e.g.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">such as</span> the refresh rates of electronic changeable message sign displays or the overall quality of a device that has been <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">out</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">in service</span> on the roadway for many years;</li>
		<li>The color perception of signs;</li>
		<li>The electronically perceptible conspicuity and contrast of markings in different environments and lighting conditions;</li>
		<li>The <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation system</span> camera technolog<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">ies</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">y</span> and device photometric characteristics in <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">reading</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">interpreting</span> various types of traffic signals</li>
		<li>The ability to discern and comprehend temporary traffic control devices and their varying applications, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">e.g.</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">such as</span> active electronic display devices<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> or</span> flaggers<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">, etc.</span>;<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> and</span></li>
		<li>The ability to decipher traffic control at <span class="text_added change_from_npa">highway-</span>rail <span class="text_added change_from_npa">or highway-LRT </span>grade crossings, especially <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">with</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">at</span> passive <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">control</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">grade crossings</span>.</li>
	</ol>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para02">02</span><span class="support">These and other challenges might limit the functionality of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation systems, thus</span> making them less effective or functional<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, with potential implications for safety and traffic operations</span>. The uniform design and consistent application of standardized traffic control devices supports the functionality of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation system</span> technology in many situations. Similarly, good traffic control device maintenance practices and programs will help improve the potential for <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">vehicle DAS</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation systems</span> to operate properly in many roadway environments.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Agencies should adopt traffic control device maintenance policies and or practices with consideration to both the human <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">vehicle operator</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driver</span> and <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation system</span> technology needs (see <a href ="part1d.xhtml#section1D10">Sections <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">1A.12</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">1D.10</span></a>, <a href ="part2a.xhtml#section2A19">2A.<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">18</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">19</span></a>, <a href ="part3a.xhtml#section3A05">3A.05</a> and <a href ="part4a.xhtml#section4A10">4A.10</a><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> of this Manual</span>).</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Engineering judgment (see <a href ="part1d.xhtml#section1D03">Section 1D.03</a><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> of this Manual</span>) used to determine traffic control device selection and placement should consider uniformity in application and location needed to support both the human <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">vehicle operator</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driver</span> and <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation system</span> technology.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para05">05</span><span class="support">A systematic approach to traffic control device selection, application, and maintenance taking into consideration certain fundamental principles, will help agencies considering the inclusion of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">DAS vehicles</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">AVs</span> on their roadways. Generally, improvements to traffic control device uniformity and improved maintenance policies and practices that keep traffic control devices in good working order with high levels of conspicuity that <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">benefit</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">are beneficial to</span> the human <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">vehicle operator</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driver</span> will <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">benefit DAS vehicles</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">be beneficial to AVs</span> as well.</span></p>

	<p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section5A04_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Agencies should apply the following fundamental principles and considerations as they evaluate traffic control devices and other maintenance practices to support <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">AV</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">driving automation system</span> technologies during maintenance and infrastructure improvements:</span></p>

	<ol type="A" class="guidance">
	<li><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">The</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Applying</span> uniform and consistent <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">application of </span>traffic control devices on each type of roadway<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">;</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, and</span> applying a similar approach to traffic control at similar locations in similar situations.</li>
	<li><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Established</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Establishing</span> maintenance policies that incorporate effective practices to <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">ensure the clear message intended to the road user on</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">identify and then fix or replace in a timely manner any</span> traffic control device<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span> <span class="text_added change_from_npa">that is </span>reaching the end of their useful life, or are damaged or otherwise no longer serviceable, be identified, fixed or replaced in a timely manner.</li>
	<li><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">T</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Making sure that t</span>emporary or emergency traffic control, to the extent <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">practical</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">practicable</span>, is planned in advance using devices that comply with the provisions of this Manual and <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">following</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">that follow</span> policies designed to <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">ensure</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">provide</span> uniformity throughout the site and across jurisdiction.</li>
	<li><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Removal of</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Removing</span> extraneous devices that are no longer necessary or that provide limited benefit to vehicle operation or navigation.</li>
	</ol>


  </div>
</body>
</html>