<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 1D - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1><span class="text_added">Chapter 1D. Provisions Applicable to Traffic Control Devices in General</span></h1>

	<h3 id="section1D01">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.02</span><span class="text_added">1D.01</span> <span class="text_added">Purpose and </span>Principles of Traffic Control Devices</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>19. In Section 1D.01 (existing Section 1A.02), retitled, “Purpose and Principles of Traffic Control Devices,” FHWA proposes to revise the title to reflect the content with the proposed relocation of a paragraph from existing Section 1A.01 to this section. </p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The retitling is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>Also, FHWA proposes to revise the Guidance about what makes a traffic control device effective by changing “meet five basic requirements” to “be consistent with these principles.” FHWA proposes these revisions to clarify that the principles are recommendations rather than requirements, as they are contained within a Guidance provision.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">This change is not adopted.  Instead, the phrase “meet five basic requirements” is deleted, as it is unnecessary.</p>

	<p>In addition, FHWA proposes to add a new Standard indicating that traffic control devices used on site roadways open to the public shall have the same shape, color, and meaning as those required by the MUTCD, unless exceptions are noted in the Manual.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The added Standard is adopted as proposed, except that the word “all” at the start of the provision is not adopted, as it is unnecessary.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">In addition, in response to numerous comments, the phrase “reasonable and prudent” is removed from two places in this Section, because it is subjective and not defined.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para01">01</span> <span class="support">The purpose of traffic control devices, as well as the principles for their use, is to promote highway safety<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, inclusion and mobility of all road users,</span> and efficiency by providing for the orderly movement of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">all <span class="text_added">reasonable and prudent </span></span>road users on streets, highways, bikeways, and <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways</span>open to public travel throughout the Nation.<span class="text_added"> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">See </span><a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A03">Section 1A.03</a> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">for</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">contains</span> additional information on target road users.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para02">02</span> <span class="support">This Manual contains the basic principles that govern the design and use of traffic control devices for all streets, highways, bikeways, and <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways</span>open to public travel (see definition in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.02</span></a>) regardless of type or class or the public agency, official, or owner having jurisdiction. T<span class="text_added change_from_npa">he text of t</span>his Manual<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">’s</span> text specifies the restriction on the use of a device if it is intended for limited application or for a specific system. It is important that these principles be given primary consideration in the selection and application of each device.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">To be effective, a traffic control device should<span class="text_deleted"> meet five basic requirements</span>:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="guidance">
      <li>Fulfill a need;</li>
      <li>Command attention;</li>
      <li>Convey a clear, simple meaning;</li>
      <li>Command respect from road users; and</li>
      <li>Give adequate time for proper response.</li>
    </ol>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para04">04</span> <span class="guidance">Design, placement, operation, maintenance, and uniformity are aspects that should be carefully considered in order to maximize the ability of a traffic control device to <span class="text_deleted">meet the five requirements </span><span class="text_added">be consistent with the five principles </span>listed in the <a href="#section1D01_para03"><span class="text_deleted">previous</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">preceding</span>paragraph</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Paragraph 3</span></a><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> of this Section</span>. Vehicle speed <span class="text_added change_from_npa">and road-user types </span>should be carefully considered as an element that governs the design, operation, placement, and location of various traffic control devices.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para05">05</span> <span class="guidance">The proper use of traffic control devices should provide the <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">reasonable and prudent </span>road user with the information necessary to <span class="text_added change_from_npa">safely, </span>efficiently<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> and lawfully use the streets, highways, pedestrian facilities, and bikeways.</span>&gt;</p>

	<span class="text_added"><p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D01_para06">06</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">All t</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">T</span>raffic control devices used on site roadways open to public travel shall have the same shape, color, and meaning as those required by the MUTCD for use on public highways, except as provided <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">in Paragraph 5 of <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A03">Section 1A.03</a></span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">otherwise in this Manual</span>. Sign size exceptions are noted in each <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Chapter</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Part</span> as applicable.</span></p></span>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">The definition of the word “speed” varies depending on its use. The definitions of specific speed terms are contained in <a href="#section1A13">Section 1A.13</a>.</span></p></span>

<div class="change_from_npa">
    <span class="text_deleted"><h3><span class="text_added">Section 1D.02 Traffic Control Device Characteristics and Activities</span></h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>20. FHWA proposes to add a new Section 1D.02, titled, “Traffic Control Device Characteristics and Activities,” with new text recommended by Item 527 of the <a href="http://ncutcd.org/wp-content/uploads/MUTCD/MUTCD-20-Year-Vision-NCUTCD-Appvd-1-9-14-FINAL.pdf">20-Year Vision and Strategic Plan for the MUTCD</a>. </p>
	<p>The proposed text describes seven characteristics and activities associated with traffic control devices. FHWA proposes this revision since clarifying distinctions between types of traffic control device activities would assist agencies in establishing the qualifications needed to perform the selected activities.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">New Section 1D.02 is not adopted, as this information is more appropriately placed on the MUTCD Web site.</p>
	</div>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">The characteristics and activities associate with traffic control devices are:</span></p>
	<ol type="A" class="support">
		<li>Meaning—The message the device is intended to convey and the expected road user response to te device.</li>
		<li>Appearance—The general physical characteristics of a specific device as it appears to the road user. These characteristics include color, shape, legend, acoustical and tactile features, and the relative position and layout of individual elements.</li>
		<li>Use (Application)—The process of making a decision to use a specific device at a specific location and the manner and criteria by which such a decision is made given the specific circumstances at that location.</li>
		<li>Installation—The process of determining the proper position for a device and providing appropriate visibility for the device. Considerations related to installation include height, lateral distance (offset), longitudinal distance from a reference point, and distance from other devices. Installation also includes addressing the visibility/detection of a device. In addition to height, lateral distance, and longitudinal distance, visibility/detection incorporates size, conspicuity, and contrast with the environmental background. The physical activity of installing a device is not an activity for MUTCD content purposes.</li>
		<li>Operation—The process of establishing how the physical characteristics of a device changes over a relatively short period of time to impact the movement of traffic. Most traffic control devices are static and do not have an operational aspect. However, some devices do operate (such as traffic control signals and changeable message signs). Operation does not include gradual deterioration over an extended period of time of physical characteristics due to aging, weather, or other factors.</li>
		<li>Maintenance—The process of monitoring the visibility, crashworthiness, operational, acoustical and tactile features of a device and its performance and taking appropriate actions so that it will function in the intended manner throughout the life of the device and be replaced at the end of its useful life.</li>
		<li>Removal—The process of determining when to remove a specific device from service.</li>
	</ol>

	</span></span>

	<span class="text_deleted"><h3>Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.06</span><span class="text_added">1D.03</span> Uniformity of Traffic Control Devices</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>Proposed new Section 1D.03 Uniformity of Traffic Control Devices (not discussed in NPA Preamble)</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The proposed new Section 1D.03 is not adopted. Instead, the proposed text of the section is relocated to Section 1A.01, where it is more appropriately placed.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Uniformity of the meaning of traffic control devices is vital to their effectiveness. <span class="text_deleted">The meanings ascribed to devices in this Manual are in general accord with the publications mentioned in <a href="#section1A11">Section 1A.11</a>. </span>Uniformity means treating similar situations in a similar way.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support">Uniformity of devices simplifies the task of the road user because it aids in recognition and understanding, thereby reducing perception/reaction time. Uniformity assists road users, law enforcement officers, and traffic courts by giving everyone the same interpretation. Uniformity assists public highway officials through efficiency in manufacture, installation, maintenance, and administration.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support">The use of uniform traffic control devices does not, in itself, constitute uniformity. A standard device used where it is not appropriate is as objectionable as a non-standard device; in fact, this might be worse, because such misuse might result in disrespect at those locations where the device is needed and appropriate.</span></p></span></div>

    <h3 id="section1D02">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.07</span><span class="text_added">1D.02</span> Responsibility <span class="text_added">and Authority </span>for Traffic Control Devices</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>21. FHWA proposes to combine existing Sections 1A.07 and 1A.08 into a single Section 1D.04, titled, “Responsibility and Authority for Traffic Control Devices.” With this revision, FHWA proposes to delete the last two sentences of Paragraph 1 as this text is redundant with Section 1B.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The section is adopted as Section 1D.02.  These changes are adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to relocate several existing paragraphs since they better align with content presented in other Sections.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">These changes are adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to delete an existing Support paragraph since all States have a law on the adoption of, and have adopted, the MUTCD.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The deletion is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to delete an existing Guidance paragraph since this text is redundant to paragraphs contained in other Sections.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The deletion is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to revise an existing Standard paragraph to change the word “advertisements” to “public announcements or notices” because the existing term can be misinterpreted to refer only to announcements of a commercial nature.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>In addition, FHWA proposes to delete an existing Guidance paragraph because the Standard paragraphs in this and other sections define (1) the authorization for placement and, by inference, removal of traffic control devices; and (2) the criteria or warrants for the installation of traffic control devices.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The deletion is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>Lastly, FHWA proposes to add two additional Support paragraphs to emphasize further that the highway right-of-way is reserved for highway related purposes in accordance with 23 CFR 1.23(b), and that States may adopt restrictions on outdoor advertising that resembles official traffic control devices, which is required by 23 CFR 750.180 in certain cases.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The first additional proposed Support paragraph is not adopted, based on a comment that the referenced 23 CFR 1.23(b) does not apply to all public right-of-way, especially within local jurisdictions. Also, there are some public highways that are located on easements (such as through National Forests) and not within a right-of-way. Further, the regulation is not related to traffic control devices and should not be included in the MUTCD. The second additional proposed Support paragraph is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">The responsibility for the design, placement, operation, maintenance, and uniformity of traffic control devices <span class="text_added">in compliance with the provisions of this Manual </span>shall rest with the public agency or the official having jurisdiction, or, in the case of <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> or private toll roads</span></span>open to public travel, with the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.<span class="text_deleted"> 23 CFR 655.603 adopts the MUTCD as the national standard for all traffic control devices installed on any street, highway, bikeway, or private road open to public travel (see definition in <a href="#section1A13">Section 1A.13</a>). When a State or other Federal agency manual or supplement is required, that manual or supplement shall be in substantial conformance with the National MUTCD.</span></span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">The Introduction of this Manual contains information regarding the meaning of substantial conformance and the applicability of the MUTCD to private roads open to public travel.</span></p></span>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support">The “Uniform Vehicle Code” (see <a href="#section1A11">Section 1A.11</a>) has the following provision in Section 15-104 for the adoption of a uniform manual:</span></p>

    <ol type="a" class="support">
      <li>“The [State Highway Agency] shall adopt a manual and specification for a uniform system of traffic control devices consistent with the provisions of this code for use upon highways within this State. Such uniform system shall correlate with and so far as possible conform to the system set forth in the most recent edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, and other standards issued or endorsed by the Federal Highway Administrator.”</li>

      <li>“The Manual adopted pursuant to subsection (a) shall have the force and effect of law.”</li>
    </ol></span>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/>  <span class="guidance">States should adopt Section 15-116 of the “Uniform Vehicle Code,” which states that, “No person shall install or maintain in any area of private property used by the public any sign, signal, marking, or other device intended to regulate, warn, or guide traffic unless it conforms with the State manual and specifications adopted under Section 15-104.”</span></p></span>

	    <h3><span class="text_deleted">Section 1A.08 Authority for Placement of Traffic Control Devices</span></h3>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para02">02</span><span class="standard">All regulatory traffic control devices shall be supported by laws, ordinances, or regulations.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para03">03</span> <span class="standard">Traffic control devices, <span class="text_deleted">advertisements, </span><span class="text_added">public </span>announcements<span class="text_added"> or notices</span>, and other signs or messages within the highway right-of-way shall be placed only as authorized by a public authority or the official having jurisdiction, or, in the case of <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways or private toll roads</span>open to public travel, by the private owner or private official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para04">04</span> <span class="standard">When the public agency or the official having jurisdiction over a street or highway or, in the case of <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">private roads</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">site roadways</span> open to public travel, the private owner or private official having jurisdiction, has granted proper authority, others such as contractors and public utility companies shall be <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">permitted</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">allowed</span> to install temporary traffic control devices in temporary traffic control zones. Such traffic control devices shall <span class="text_deleted">conform</span><span class="text_added">comply</span> with the <span class="text_deleted">Standards</span><span class="text_added">provisions</span>of this Manual.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Provisions of this Manual are based upon the concept that effective traffic control depends upon both appropriate application of the devices and reasonable enforcement of the regulations.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support">Although some highway design features, such as curbs, median barriers, guardrails, speed humps or tables, and textured pavement, have a significant impact on traffic operations and safety, they are not considered to be traffic control devices and provisions regarding their design and use are generally not included in this Manual.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para05">05</span><span class="standard">Signs and other devices that do not have any traffic control purpose that are placed within the highway right-of-way shall not be located where they will interfere with, or detract from, traffic control devices.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="guidance">Any unauthorized traffic control device or other sign or message placed on the highway right-of-way by a private organization or individual constitutes a public nuisance and should be removed. All unofficial or non-essential traffic control devices, signs, or messages should be removed.</span></p></span>

	<span class="text_added">
	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">23 CFR 1.23(b) requires that the highway right-of-way be used exclusively for highway purposes.</span></p></span></div>

	<p><span class="text_added change_from_npa"><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section1D02_para06">06</span><span class="support">States are encouraged to adopt, through policy or legislation, the provisions of 23 CFR 750.108 that restrict outdoor advertising from resembling traffic control devices.</span></p>
	</span>

	<h3 id="section1D03">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.09</span><span class="text_added">1D.03</span> Engineering Study and Engineering Judgment</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>22. In Section 1D.05 (existing Section 1A.09) Engineering Study and Engineering Judgment, FHWA proposes to revise existing Support paragraphs. FHWA proposes this revision based on Official Ruling No. 1(09)–1(I), and to emphasize a clear understanding of the application of engineering studies and engineering judgement in this Manual.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">See Preamble of Federal Register for discussion of this proposed change.</p>
	</div>
	<div class="fr">

	<p>In proposed Section 1D.05 (now Section 1D.03), FHWA proposed to provide new Standard, Guidance, and Support paragraphs to supplement existing Guidance and Support. The new text is based on FHWA Official Ruling No. 1(09)–1 (I)  and clarifies the application of engineering study and engineering judgment to the selection and specification of traffic control devices for implementation. Among the areas covered are the extent to which the specialized training and experience of an engineer are involved in traffic control device decisions and activities, and the authority of a jurisdiction or agency to make and implement those decisions, for the purpose of ensuring that facilities open to public travel meet a high level of safety that the public expects.</p>

	<p>The changes clarify the role of trained engineers as important advisors whose engineering studies are valuable inputs in the overall decisionmaking process. Several commenters expressed concern over the definitions of engineering judgment and engineering study, indicating that others besides engineers or those under the supervision of an engineer should be allowed to make decisions about traffic control device application and activities.</p>

	<p>The primary concern expressed was that small public agencies may not have staff that meets these requirements and therefore should be allowed to make those types of decisions regardless of engineering oversight. In response to these concerns, FHWA adopts the proposed language with minor edits noting that the text does not require every traffic control device decision to be made by an engineer or be made under the supervision of an engineer. However, decisions requiring engineering judgment and engineering study do require the specialized training and experience of an engineer, or someone acting under the supervision or direction of an engineer, to ensure the public facilities meet a high level of safety expected by the public for clarity, comprehension and legibility of message, as well as uniformity of application of traffic control devices in similar situations. The selection, design, and application of traffic control devices are inherently engineering functions. Traffic control device activities, such as installing and maintaining traffic control devices, are engineering functions conducted in accordance with plans, specifications, or other functions developed by and under the supervision or direction of an engineer. Engineers have a specific level of responsibility and accountability under professional licensure and are subject to a professional board and code of ethics. When necessary, there are many ways in which local communities are able to obtain engineering guidance including, but not limited to, the use of consultants and local transportation assistance type programs (Local Technical Assistance Program, or similar). Other resources, such as handbooks and field installation manuals, are available for select traffic control activities for which the direct supervision of an engineer might not be necessary. Such resources are developed by an engineering organization and adopted by the State or county transportation agency for use on roadways within their boundaries, including for local roadways.</p>

	<p>To further clarify the intent of the provisions, FHWA adopts additional language to explain that the MUTCD does not mandate, and is not intending to imply, that an engineer must make the final decision whether to implement or execute the determination or advice of an engineer by installing or constructing the traffic control device to the engineer's specification in the field. Rather, the engineer, individual under supervision or direction of an engineer, or other individual as duly authorized by State law to engage in the practice of engineering, develops an engineering-based solution that includes the specifications for selection and placement of traffic control devices. The responsibility for a final decision to implement traffic control solutions rests with the agency (or owner) having jurisdiction over the roadway, after consultation with and based on advice from the engineer, to ensure that the design and operational intent of the facility are safely and effectively conveyed to road users. In many cases, it might be an engineer to whom the agency has delegated that authority. In other cases, such as with smaller agencies or owners of private roads open to public travel, it is the roadway owner that makes the decision on implementation, similarly following consultation with an engineer on the selection, design, and application of the specific traffic control device at the specific location to communicate safely and effectively with the road user.</p>

	<p>In the final rule, the section is renumbered to Section 1D.03.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para01">01</span> <span class="support">Definitions of <span class="text_deleted">an</span><span class="text_added">professional engineer,</span> engineering study<span class="text_added">,</span>and engineering judgment are contained in <a href="#section1C02">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.02</span></a>.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added"><p><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para02">02</span><span class="support">The application of engineering study and engineering judgement is a fundamental <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">tenet</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">principle</span> of the <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">application</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">use</span> of traffic control devices. It is for this reason that, in most cases, the selection of a particular device is not required by a Standard provision, but is determined by engineering study or engineering judgment. Many Standard provisions in this Manual specifically require, by explicit language in the individual provisions or by implication, the application of engineering study or engineering judgment in applying those Standards. Site-specific conditions might result in the determination that it is impossible or impracticable to comply with a Standard<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> at that location</span>. In such a case, a deviation from the requirement of a particular Standard at that location might be the only possibility. In such limited, specific cases, the deviation is allowed, provided that the agency or official having jurisdiction fully document<span class="text_added change_from_npa">s</span>, through <span class="text_added change_from_npa">an </span>engineering study, the engineering basis for the deviation.</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">This Manual describes the application of traffic control devices, but shall not be a legal requirement for their installation.</span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para04">04</span> <span class="support">The MUTCD does not mandate, and is not intending to imply, that an engineer must make the final decision whether to implement or execute the determination or advice of an engineer by installing or constructing the traffic control device to the engineer's specification in the field. Rather, the engineer, individual under supervision of an engineer, or other individual as duly authorized by State law to engage in the practice of engineering, develops an engineering-based solution that includes the specifications for selection and placement of traffic control devices, but the responsibility for a final decision to implement that solution rests with the agency having jurisdiction over the roadway, after consultation with and based on advice from the engineer.</span></p>
	</span>
	</div>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">The decision to use a particular device at a particular location should be made on the basis of either an engineering study or the application of engineering judgment<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> by an engineer, someone under the direct supervision of an engineer, or other individual as duly authorized by State law to engage in the practice of engineering</span>. Thus, while this Manual provides Standards, Guidance, and Options for design and applications of traffic control devices, this Manual should not be considered a substitute for engineering judgment. Engineering judgment should be exercised in the selection and application of traffic control devices, as well as in the location and design of roads and streets that the devices complement.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Early in the processes of location and design of roads and streets, engineers should coordinate such location and design with the design and placement of the traffic control devices to be used with such roads and streets.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para07">07</span><span class="guidance">Jurisdictions, or owners of <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways or private toll roads</span> open to public travel, with responsibility for traffic control that do not have <span class="text_added change_from_npa">an </span>engineer<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span> on their staff<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span> who <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">are</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">is</span> trained and/or experienced in traffic control devices should seek engineering assistance from others, such as the State transportation agency, their county, a nearby large city, or a traffic engineering consultant.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span> <br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para08">08</span><span class="support">The provisions of this Manual are intended to be interpreted and applied by engineers or those under the supervision of an engineer. The construction of the provisions of this Manual, therefore, are informed by bases referenced in <a href="#section1D03_para09">Paragraphs 9</a> and <a href="#section1D03_para10">10</a> of this Section.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para09">09</span><span class="support">The National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) has defined the practice of engineering as "any service or creative work requiring engineering education, training, and experience in the application of engineering principles and the interpretation of engineering data to engineering activities that potentially impact the health, safety, and welfare of the public." The practice of engineering is, therefore, subject to regulation in the public interest and is regulated by the State licensing boards in order to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The NCEES has defined an engineer as "an individual who is qualified to practice engineering by reason of engineering education, training, and experience in the application of engineering principles and the interpretation of engineering data."</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para10">10</span><span class="support">The U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) has defined the professional knowledge of engineering as "the comprehensive, in-depth knowledge of mathematical, physical, and engineering sciences applicable to a specialty field of engineering that characterizes a full 4-year engineering program leading to a bachelor's degree, or the equivalent." The OPM has defined professional ability to apply engineering knowledge as "the ability to (a) apply fundamental and diversified professional engineering concepts, theories, and practices to achieve engineering objectives with versatility, judgment, and perception; (b) adapt and apply methods and techniques of related scientific disciplines; and (c) organize, analyze, interpret, and evaluate scientific data in the solution of engineering problems."</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D03_para11">11</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted">As part of the Federal-aid Program, each State is required to have a Local Technical Assistance Program (LTAP) and to provide technical assistance to local highway agencies. </span>Requisite technical training in the application of the principles of the MUTCD <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">is</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">might be</span> available from the State’s Local Technical Assistance Program<span class="text_added"> (LTAP)</span> for needed engineering guidance and assistance.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section1D04">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.03</span><span class="text_added">1D.04</span> Design of Traffic Control Devices</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>23. In Section 1D.06 (existing Section 1A.03) Design of Traffic Control Devices, FHWA proposes to revise existing Guidance to clarify that a traffic control device's design should be modified only in unusual circumstances based on an engineering study or engineering judgment.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The section is adopted as Section 1D.04.  The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to add a new Standard requiring that shapes that are exclusive to a particular sign, such as the octagon for the STOP sign, shall not be obscured by another sign mounted on the back of the assembly. This proposed change is consistent with existing provisions in proposed Section 2B.18 (existing Section 2B.10). FHWA proposes this revision to ensure that sign shapes that are of critical importance are easily recognized, because their unique shapes instantly convey a unique message to road users.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The addition of this new Standard in Section 1D.06 is not adopted.  Instead, it is relocated to Chapter 2A, where it is more appropriately located, since it deals exclusively with signs.
</p>

	<p>Lastly, FHWA also proposes to add a new Standard indicating that colors shall be consistent across the face of a sign or panel, and that color gradients shall not be allowed. FHWA proposes this revision to provide clarification due to the technological capabilities of sign printers, which have entered the market in just the last few years.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The addition of this new Standard is not adopted. Instead, it is relocated to Chapter 2A, where it is more appropriately located, since it deals exclusively with signs.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Devices should be designed so that features such as size, shape, color, composition, lighting or retroreflection, and contrast are combined to draw attention to the devices; <span class="text_added change_from_npa">so </span>that size, shape, color, and simplicity of message combine to produce a clear meaning; <span class="text_added change_from_npa">so </span>that legibility and size combine with placement to <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">permit</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">provide</span> adequate time for response; and <span class="text_added change_from_npa">so </span>that uniformity, size, legibility, and reasonableness of the message combine to command respect.</span></p>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para02">02</span><span class="option"><span class="text_deleted">With the e</span><span class="text_added">E</span>xcept<span class="text_deleted">ion of</span><span class="text_added"> for</span> symbols and colors, minor modifications in the specific design elements of a device may be made <span class="text_added">based on an engineering study or engineering judgment, in accordance with <a href="#section1D04_para03">Paragraph 3</a> of this Section, </span>provided the essential appearance characteristics are preserved.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para03">03</span> <span class="guidance">Aspects of <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the standard design of </span>a <span class="text_added">traffic control </span>device<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">’s standard design</span> should <span class="text_added">not </span>be modified <span class="text_deleted">only if</span><span class="text_added">unless</span> there is a demonstrated need<span class="text_added"> in unusual circumstances, based on an engineering study or engineering judgment</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para04">04</span><span class="support">An example of <span class="text_added change_from_npa">acceptably </span>modifying <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the design of </span>a device<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">’s design</span> would be to modify the Combination Horizontal Alignment/Intersection (W1-10) sign to show intersecting side roads on both sides rather than on just one side of the major road within the curve.</span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_deleted"><span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/>
	<span class="paranum" id="section1D04_para05">05</span><span class="standard">Shapes that are exclusive to a particular sign (e.g., octagon for Stop, pennant for No Passing Zone, or circle for Railroad Advance) shall not be obscured by another sign mounted on the back of the same assembly.</span></p>
	</span></span></div>

    <h3 id="section1D05">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.12</span><span class="text_added">1D.05</span> Color Code</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>24. In Section 1D.07 (existing Section 1A.12) Color Code, FHWA proposes to add a Standard indicating that colors shall be used only as prescribed in this Manual for specific devices or applications. FHWA proposes this revision to clarify that the listed color definitions are general designations and do not mean that any color can be applied in any combination or orientation for non-standard signs. This proposed change is for clarification purposes and does not represent a change to existing requirements.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The section is adopted as Section 1D.05.  The change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">A comment suggesting clarification that the color code for black or white applies only to background is not adopted, as this color code in Part 1 is for all traffic control devices, not just signs.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para01">01</span><span class="support">The following color code establishes general meanings for 11 colors of a total of 13 colors that have been identified as being appropriate for use in conveying traffic control information.</span></p>
    
    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para02">02</span><span class="standard">The general meaning of the 13 colors shall be as follows:</span></p>

    <ol type="A" class="standard">
      <li>Black—regulation</li>

      <li>Blue—road<span class="text_deleted"> </span><span class="text_added">-</span>user services guidance, tourist information, and evacuation route</li>

      <li>Brown—recreational and cultural interest area guidance</li>

      <li>Coral—<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">unassigned</span><span class="text_added"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> (</span>reserved for future designation<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">)</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> (see Paragraph 4 of this Section)</span></span></li>

      <li>Fluorescent Pink—incident management</li>

      <li>Fluorescent Yellow-Green—pedestrian warning, bicycle warning, playground warning, school bus <span class="text_added change_from_npa">warning, </span>and school warning</li>

      <li>Green—indicated movements <span class="text_added">or actions </span>permitted<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> and</span> direction guidance</li>

      <li>Light Blue—<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">unassigned</span><span class="text_added"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> (</span>reserved for future designation<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">)</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> (see <a href="#section1D05_para04">Paragraph 4</a> of this Section)</span></span></li>

      <li>Orange—temporary traffic control</li>

      <li>Purple—<span class="text_deleted">lanes </span>restricted to use only by vehicles with registered electronic toll collection (ETC) accounts</li>

      <li>Red—stop or prohibition</li>

      <li>White—regulation</li>

      <li>Yellow—warning</li>
    </ol>

	<span class="text_added"><p><span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para03">03</span><span class="standard">These colors shall be used only as prescribed for the specific devices or applications throughout this Manual.</span></p></span>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D05_para04">04</span><span class="support">The two colors for which general meanings have not yet been assigned are being reserved for future applications that will be determined only by <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the </span>FHWA after consultation with the States, the engineering community, and the general public. The meanings described in this Section are of a general nature. More specific assignments of colors are given in the individual Parts of this Manual relating to each class of devices. Tolerance limits for each color are contained in 23 CFR Part 655, Appendix to Subpart F and are available at the Federal Highway Administration’s MUTCD <span class="text_deleted">website</span><span class="text_added">Web site</span> at <a href="../../index.html">http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov</a><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> or by writing to the FHWA, Office of Safety Research and Development (HRD-T-301), 6300 Georgetown Pike, McLean, VA 22101</span>. </span></p>

	<h3 id="section1D06"><span class="text_added">Section 1D.06 Public Domain, Copyrights, and Patents</span></h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>25. FHWA proposes to create a new Section 1D.08, titled, “Public Domain, Copyrights, and Patents,” with new Standard and Support paragraphs. FHWA proposes this revision to clarify the existing provisions on this topic with respect to traffic control devices, and that the meaning, appearance, operation, and application of traffic control devices as a road user experiences them shall not be protected by a patent, trademark, or copyright due to its adverse impact on the very uniformity the MUTCD is intended to promote. However, their method of assembly, their method of manufacture, and their component parts can be, and often are, protected.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The new Section is renumbered to Section 1D.06 and the text is adopted as proposed.   Also, in response to a comment, in the first Support paragraph a sentence is added to clarify and give examples of protected traffic control device components or parts to which the requirement to be in the public domain does not apply.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">A number of commenters supported the basic provisions on patented, trademarked, and proprietary devices that have been and continue to be in the MUTCD, stating that it is especially important for local jurisdictions to have easy and available access to the use of traffic control devices that are unburdened by patents or special use requirements and that having them in the public domain immeasurably promotes widespread and consistent application of approved traffic control devices. On the other hand, numerous commenters requested removal of those provisions, citing a belief that including some such devices to be allowed in experimentations and ultimately allowed in the MUTCD could potentially improve highway safety. These requests are not adopted. As explained in the NPA preamble, the added text is clarification of the existing requirements that is necessary for maintaining uniformity.</p>

	<p>Uniformity in the display of traffic control devices is central to the underlying foundation of the MUTCD. As such, FHWA establishes the criteria therein with uniformity in mind, including a limitation on patents, trademarks, and copyrights associated with traffic control devices. This limited prohibition on intellectual property associated with a traffic control device is stated in the MUTCD to be associated with the device's “design and application provision contained in [the] Manual.”</p>

	<p>FHWA occasionally receives requests to approve patented traffic control device concepts for potential open-road experimentation under the MUTCD provisions, with the ultimate intent of having the devices adopted in the provisions of the MUTCD through rulemaking. FHWA believes that those involved in the development of new traffic control devices, as well as highway agencies being requested to experiment with these devices, could benefit from further clarification of the term “design and application provision” of a traffic control device as provided for in the MUTCD, to understand better which aspects of devices can be patented, trademarked, or copyrighted.</p>

	<p>In addition, FHWA continues to receive inquiries related to its recent <a href="https://www.federalregister.gov/citation/84-FR-51023">rulemaking </a> that rescinded regulations related to the procurement of patented or proprietary products on highway projects, which did not change the patent provisions of the MUTCD. Some stakeholders believed that the removal of restrictions on the procurement of patented or proprietary products either did extend or should have extended to the patent provisions of the MUTCD as well. However, the limitation in the MUTCD is based on uniformity and its purpose is separate and distinct from <a href="https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-23/section-635.411">23 CFR 635.411</a>, which addresses the procedures for the procurement of proprietary products in highway construction using Federal-aid funds. The MUTCD limitation on proprietary products necessarily excludes proprietary traffic control devices which claim protection on the message conveyed. The purpose of this limitation is to ensure uniformity in the message. However, any other aspects of a device may be patented so long as the appearance, audible message, or other aspects of the message conveyed remain freely reproducible by all without infringing on any proprietary rights or interests.</p>

	<p>The proposed MUTCD language, along with this document, provides further clarification and background on this subject matter. The information clarifies what aspects of a traffic control device can and cannot be patented or otherwise protected. In general, the component parts of a traffic control device may be patented or otherwise protected, but how the device is to appear and operate to the observer (i.e., how it would be specified in the MUTCD) must remain in the public domain and must not be covered by any patent that would preclude others from freely producing the traffic control device. As a result, the road user will always experience the same traffic control device for similar conditions in the same way.</p>

	<p>The purpose of addressing this aspect of traffic control devices is due to the adverse effect that protections on what the road user experiences would have on uniformity in the message to the road user. By virtue of patent or other protections on the message itself, alternate messages would have to be allowed to address the same conditions so as not to include infringement by competitors.</p>

	<p>Based on the varying views that the public has expressed in the past on this topic, FHWA requests that commenters provide sufficient detail and explanation of how the proposal or alternatives would support both uniformity and cost-effectiveness of traffic control devices, and enable their manufacture without infringement on protections enjoyed by patent holders. Specific references should be made to the proposed MUTCD text and to the explanation provided in this document.</p>

	</div>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para01">01</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_deleted">Any t</span><span class="text_added">T</span>raffic control device design or application provision<span class="text_added">s</span> contained in this Manual shall be <span class="text_deleted">considered to be </span>in the public domain. Traffic control devices contained in this Manual shall not be protected by a patent, trademark, or copyright, except for the Interstate Shield<span class="text_added">, 511 Travel Information pictograph,</span> <span class="text_added change_from_npa">National Scenic Byway graphic, </span>and any items <span class="text_added change_from_npa">under the stewardship of or </span>owned by <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the </span>FHWA.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para02">02</span><span class="standard">A traffic control device design or application shall not be eligible for official experimentation (see <a href="part1b.xhtml#section1B05">Section 1B.05</a>) or interim approval (see <a href="part1b.xhtml#section1B07">Section 1B.07</a>) unless it is in the public domain. Express abandonment of any and all forms of proprietary protection, such as patents, trademarks, or copyrights, related to the design and application of the traffic control device shall satisfy the requirement for the traffic control device to be in the public domain.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para03">03</span><span class="standard">The requirement for the traffic control device to be in the public domain shall not apply to individual components used in the assembly or manufacture of the traffic control device.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para04">04</span><span class="support">The limitation on patented, trademarked, or copyrighted traffic control devices applies to the message that the device conveys to the road user. If a patent or other protection covers the device's communication to the road user by virtue of its appearance, audible message, or other aspects of the message conveyed (<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">e.g.,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">such as</span> the order in which traffic control signal indications change from green to yellow to red), then the device is considered to be protected and not in the public domain. Such a device is precluded from inclusion in this Manual. The purpose of this limitation is to ensure uniformity of the messaging of individually approved traffic control devices. This limitation does not apply to other aspects of a device (<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">e.g.,</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">such as</span> internal controls, circuitry, electronics, mechanics, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">or </span>housing<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">, etc.</span>) so long as the appearance, audible message, or other aspects of the message conveyed, including the manner of conveyance, remain freely reproducible by all without infringing on any proprietary rights or interests. This Manual does not prohibit such other aspects of a traffic control device that meet the legal requirements from being protected through patent, trademark, or copyright; and does not restrict components, parts, manufacturing processes, or similar aspects of traffic control devices from being patented or otherwise protected.<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> Examples of acceptable protected traffic control device components or parts might include: sign sheeting or retroreflectivity technology, internal electronic components of traffic signal controllers, and breakaway sign support mechanisms.</span></span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para05">05</span><span class="support">Pictographs, as defined in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.02</span></a>, are embedded in traffic control devices but the pictographs themselves are not considered traffic control devices for the purposes of <a href="#section1D06_01">Paragraph <span class="known_error_deleted">4</span><span class="known_error_added">1</span></a><span class="text_added"> of this Section</span>.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section1D06_para06">06</span><span class="support"><span class="text_added">Business identification logos, as defined in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a>, are embedded in traffic control devices but the pictographs themselves are not considered traffic control devices for the purposes of <a href="#section1D06_para01">Paragraph <span class="known_error_deleted">4</span><span class="known_error_added">1</span></a> of this Section.</span></span></p>

	<h3 id="section1D07"><span class="text_added">Section 1D.07 Advertising</span></h3>
	<div class="npa">
	<p>26. FHWA proposes to create a new Section 1D.09 Advertising, with text relocated from existing Section 1A.01. In this Section, FHWA proposes to add Acknowledgment signs to the existing items that are not considered advertising, consistent with existing text in Part 2 for that type of sign.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The  section  is  adopted  as  Section  1D.07.	The changes are adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D07_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">Traffic control devices or their supports shall not bear any advertising message or any other message that is not related to traffic control.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D07_para02">02</span> <span class="support"><span class="text_added change_from_npa">Acknowledgement signs (see <a href="part2h.xhtml#section2H13">Section 2H.13</a>), Specific Service signs (see <a href="part2j.xhtml">Chapter 2J</a>), and </span>Tourist-<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">o</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">O</span>riented <span class="text_deleted">d</span><span class="text_added">D</span>irectional signs<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> (see <a href="part2k.xhtml">Chapter 2K</a>)</span><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">,</span> <span class="text_deleted">and </span>Specific Service signs<span class="text_added">, and Acknowledgement signs</span></span> are not considered advertising<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">; rather, they are classified as motorist service signs</span>.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section1D08">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.15</span><span class="text_added">1D.08</span> Abbreviations Used on Traffic Control Devices</h3>
	<div class="npa">
	<p>27. In Section 1D.10 (existing Section 1A.15) Abbreviations Used on Traffic Control Devices, FHWA proposes to revise an existing Guidance paragraph to be consistent with the notes in Table 1D–2 (existing Table 1A–2).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The section is adopted as Section 1D.08.   The revisions to the Guidance paragraph are adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para01">01</span><span class="standard">When the word messages shown in <a href="#table1D01">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-1</span><span class="text_added">1D-1</span></a> need to be abbreviated in connection with traffic control devices, the abbreviations shown in Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-1</span><span class="text_added">1D-1</span>shall be used.</span></p>

    <table border="0" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="0" id="table1D01">
      <caption>Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-1</span><span class="text_added">1D-1</span>. Acceptable Abbreviations</caption>

      <thead>
		<tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
		<th colspan="2" class="tablecell-top-left-cell">General Abbreviations</th>
		</tr>
        <tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
          <th class="tablecell-top-left-cell" scope="col">Word Message</th>
          <th class="tablecell-top-right-cell" scope="col">Standard Abbreviation</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Afternoon / Evening</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">PM</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Alternate</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">ALT</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">AM Radio</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">AM</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Avenue</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn"><span class="text_deleted">AVE, AV</span><span class="text_added">Ave, Av*</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Bicycle<span class="text_added"><span class="text_added change_from_npa">(</span>s<span class="text_added change_from_npa">)</span></span></td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">BIKE<span class="text_added">, BIKES</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Boulevard</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn"><span class="text_deleted">BLVD*</span><span class="text_added">Blvd*</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Bridge</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">(See <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added"></span>1D-2</a>)</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">CB Radio</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">CB</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Center<span class="text_deleted"> (as part of a place name)</span></td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn"><span class="text_deleted">CTR</span><span class="text_added">Ctr**</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Circle</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn"><span class="text_deleted">CIR*</span><span class="text_added">Cir*</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Civil Defense</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">CD</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Compressed Natural Gas</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">CNG</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Court</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn"><span class="text_deleted">CT*</span><span class="text_added">Ct*</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Crossing (other than highway-rail)</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">X-ING</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Drive</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn"><span class="text_deleted">DR*</span><span class="text_added">Dr*</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">East</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">E</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Electric Vehicle</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">EV</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Expressway</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn"><span class="text_deleted">EXPWY*</span><span class="text_added">Expwy*</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Feet</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">FT</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">FM Radio</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">FM</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Freeway</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn"><span class="text_deleted">FRWY, FWY*</span><span class="text_added">Fwy*</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn"><span class="text_deleted">Friday</span></td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn"><span class="text_deleted">FRI</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Hazardous Material<span class="text_added">(s)</span></td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">HAZMAT<span class="text_added">, HAZMATS</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">High Occupancy Vehicle<span class="text_added">(s)</span></td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">HOV</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Highway</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn"><span class="text_deleted">HWY*</span><span class="text_added">Hwy*</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Hospital</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">HOSP</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Hour(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            HR, HRS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Information
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            INFO
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Inherently Low Emission Vehicle
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            ILEV
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            International
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">INTL</span><span class="text_added">Intl</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Interstate</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">(See <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a>)</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Junction / Intersection
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            JCT
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">Lane</td>
          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn"><span class="text_deleted">LA*, LN*</span>(See <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a>)</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Liquid Propane Gas
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            LP-GAS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Maximum
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MAX
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Mile(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MI
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Miles Per Hour
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MPH
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Minimum
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MIN
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Minute(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            MIN<span class="text_added">, MINS</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Monday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">MON</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Morning / Late Night
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            AM
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Mount
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">MT</span><span class="text_added">Mt**</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Mountain
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">MTN</span><span class="text_added">Mtn**</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            National
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">NATL</span><span class="text_added">Natl**</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            North
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            N
          </td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">Northeast</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">NE</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">Northwest</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">NW</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Parkway
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">PKWY*</span><span class="text_added">Pkwy*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Pedestrian<span class="text_added">(s)</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            PED<span class="text_added">, PEDS</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Place
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">PL*</span><span class="text_added">Pl*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Pounds
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            LBS
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Road
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">RD*</span><span class="text_added">Rd*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Saint
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">ST</span><span class="text_added">St**</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Saturday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">SAT</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            South
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            S
          </td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">Southeast</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">SE</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">Southwest</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">SW</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            State, county, or other non-US<br/>

            or non-Interstate numbered route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            (See <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a>)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Street
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">ST*</span><span class="text_added">St*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Sunday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">SUN</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Telephone
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            PHONE
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Temporary
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            TEMP
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Terrace
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">TER*</span><span class="text_added">Ter*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">Thursday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">THURS</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Thruway
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">THWY*</span><span class="text_added">Thwy*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Ton<span class="text_added">(s)</span><span class="text_deleted">s of Weight</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            T
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Trail
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">TR*</span><span class="text_added">Tr*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Tuesday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">TUES</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Turnpike
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">TPK*</span><span class="text_added">Tpk*</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Two-Way Intersection<span class="text_added">, Two-Way Traffic</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            2-WAY
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            US Numbered Route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            (See <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a>)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Wednesday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">WED</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            West
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            W
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
		<th colspan="2"><span class="text_added">Days of the Week</span></th>
		</tr>
		<tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
          <th class="tablecell-top-left-cell" scope="col">
            <span class="text_added">Day</span>
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-top-right-cell" scope="col">
            <span class="text_added">Standard Abbreviation</span>
          </th>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Sunday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">SUN</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Monday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">MON</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Tuesday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">TUES</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">***</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Wednesday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">WED</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Thursday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">THURS</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">***</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Friday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">FRI</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            <span class="text_added">Saturday</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">SAT</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    <p class="tablenote">*<span class="text_deleted">This a</span><span class="text_added">A</span>bbreviation shall not be used for any application other than the name of a roadway.<span class="text_added"> See <a href="part2d.xhtml#table2D03">Table 2D-3</a> for complete list of street name descriptors. Examples include: Bayshore Fwy, Cross County Hwy, Mid-County Pkwy</span><br/>
	<span class="text_added">
	**Abbreviation shall not be used for any application other than as a descriptor or title within a proper name. Examples include: Vestal Ctr, Mt Hope, Pocono Mtn, Eldorado Natl Forest, St Louis<br/>
	<span class="text_added change_from_npa">***Tuesday and Thursday may be abbreviated on a Changeable Message Sign (CMS) to TUE and THU, respectively, when the number of Characters in a messages to be dispayed cannot be practically reduced through rewording to fit the number of characters supported by the CMS, such as might occur at times on a portable CMS.<br/></span>
	Note: Abbreviations shown in upper- and lower-case lettering may be in all upper-case lettering when displayed on a changeable message sign with lower resolution that will not accommodate lower-case letter forms. See <a href="part2l.xhtml">Chapter 2L</a> of this Manual.
	</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para02">02</span><span class="standard">When the word messages shown in <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a> need to be abbreviated on a portable changeable message sign, the abbreviations shown in Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span> shall be used. Unless indicated by an asterisk, these abbreviations shall only be used on portable changeable message signs.</span></p>

    <table border="0" cellpadding="2" dir="ltr" cellspacing="0" summary="List of abbreviations for word messages on portable changeable message signs" id="table1D02">
      <caption>Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span>. Abbreviations that Shall be Used Only <span class="text_added change_from_npa">for Temporary Messages </span>on Portable Changeable Message Signs</caption>

      <thead>
        <tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
          <th class="tablecell-top-left-cell" scope="col">
            Word Message
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-toprow" scope="col">
            Standard <br/>Abbreviation
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-toprow" scope="col">
            Prompt Word <span class="text_deleted">That Should </span><br/>

            Preced<span class="text_deleted">e</span><span class="text_added">ing</span> the <br/>Abbreviation
          </th>

          <th align="center" class="tablecell-toprow" scope="col">
            Prompt Word <span class="text_deleted">That Should</span> <br/>
            Follow<span class="text_added">ing</span> the <br/>Abbreviation
          </th>
			<th align="center" class="tablecell-top-right-cell" scope="col">
            <span class="text_added">Example</span>
          </th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Access
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            ACCS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Road
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">ACCS ROAD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Ahead
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            AHD
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Fog
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">FOG AHD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Blocked
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            BLKD
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Lane
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">2 LANES BLKD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Bridge
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            BR*
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            [Name]
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">BAY BR</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Cannot
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CANT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Center
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CNTR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">CNTR LANE, CNTR LN</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Chemical
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CHEM
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Spill
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">CHEM SPILL</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Condition
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            COND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Traffic
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">TRAFFIC COND</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Congested
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CONG
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Traffic
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">TRAFFIC CONG AHD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Construction
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CONST
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Ahead
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">CONST AHEAD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Crossing
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            XING
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">PED XING</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Do Not
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            DONT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Downtown
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            DWNTN
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Traffic
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">DWNTN TRAFFIC</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Eastbound
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">EAST</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">Route Number, Road Name</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">I-4 EAST</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            E-BND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">—</span><span class="text_added">Lane, Traffic</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">E-BND LANE</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Emergency
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            EMER
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">EMER VEHICLES</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Entrance, Enter
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            ENT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">ENT TO I-90</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Exit
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            EX
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Next
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">NEXT EX</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Express
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            EXP
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">EXP LANE OPEN</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Frontage
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            FRNTG
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Road
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">FRNTG RD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Hazardous
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            HAZ
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Driving
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">HAZ DRIVING</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Highway-Rail Grade Crossing
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RR XING
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">RR XING</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Interstate
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            I-*
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            [Number]
          </td>
			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">I-80</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            It Is
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            ITS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Lane<span class="text_added">(s) (travel lanes of a highway)</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LN
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_deleted">[Roadway Name]*,<br/></span>
            Right, Left, Center
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">LEFT LN ONLY<br/>2 RIGHT LNS</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Left
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LFT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_deleted">—</span><span class="text_added">Keep, Next</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">NEXT LFT</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LFT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">—</span><span class="text_added">Lane</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">LFT LANE</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Local
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LOC
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Traffic
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">LOC TRAFFIC ONLY</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Lower
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LWR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Level
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">LWR LEVEL</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Maintenance
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            MAINT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">ROAD MAINT</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Major
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            MAJ
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Accident</span><span class="text_added">Crash</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">MAJ CRASH</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Minor
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            MNR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">Accident</span><span class="text_added">Crash</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">MNR CRASH</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Normal
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            NORM
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Northbound
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">NORTH</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">Route Number, Road Name</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">US 1 NORTH</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            N-BND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">—</span><span class="text_added">Lane, Traffic</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">N-BND TRAFFIC</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Oversized
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            OVRSZ
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Load
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">OVRSZ LOAD</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Parking
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            PKING
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Pavement
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            PVMT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_deleted">Wet</span><span class="text_added">Icy</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">ICY PVMT</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Prepare
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            PREP
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            To Stop
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">PREP TO STOP</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Quality
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            QLTY
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Air
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">AIR QLTY</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Right
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Keep, Next
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">KEEP RT</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">RT LANE</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Roadwork
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            RDWK
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Ahead, [Distance]
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">RD WK 1 MILE</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_deleted">RT, </span>RTE
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Best
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">BEST RTE</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Service
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SERV
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">SERV AREA OPEN</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Shoulder
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SHLDR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">SHLDR CLOSED</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Slippery
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SLIP
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Southbound
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">SOUTH</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">Route Number, Road Name</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">CA 1 SOUTH</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            S-BND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">Lane, Traffic</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">S-BND TRAFFIC</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Speed
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            SPD
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">SPD LIMIT</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            State, county, or other non-US <br/>

            or non-Interstate numbered route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            [Route Abbreviation <br/>

            determined by <br/>

            highway agency]*
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            [Number]**
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">NY 7, CR 43</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Tires With Lugs
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            LUGS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Traffic
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            TRAF
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Travelers
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            TRVLRS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Two-Wheeled Vehicles
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            CYCLES
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Upper
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            UPR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Level
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">UPR LEVEL</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            US Numbered Route
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            US<span class="text_added">*</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            [Number]**
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">US 202</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Vehicle(s)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            VEH, VEHS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            Warning
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            WARN
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn" rowspan="2">
            Westbound
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">WEST</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            <span class="text_added">Route Number, Road Name</span>
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">IL 53 WEST</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>

		<tr>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            W-BND
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_deleted">—</span><span class="text_added">Lane, Traffic</span>
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            <span class="text_added">W-BND LANES</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>


        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            Will Not
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottomrow">
            WONT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottomrow">
            —
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottomrow">
            —
          </td>

			<td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            <span class="text_added">—</span>
          	</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    <p><span class="tablenote">* <span class="text_deleted">This a</span><span class="text_added">A</span>bbreviation, when accompanied by the prompt word, may be used on traffic control devices other than portable message signs.<span class="text_added">See <a href="#table1D01">Table 1D-1</a> for uses and format.</span><br/> ** A space and no <span class="text_deleted">dash</span><span class="text_added">hyphen</span> shall be placed between the abbreviation and the number of the route.<br/>Note: See <a href="part2l.xhtml">Chapter 2L</a> of this Manual for additional information on changeable message signs</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The abbreviations for the words listed in <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a> that also show a prompt word should not be used on a Portable Changeable Message sign <span class="text_added">(or a static sign if indicated in Table 1D-2 by an asterisk) </span>unless the prompt word shown in <a href="#table1D02">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a> either precedes or follows the abbreviation, as applicable.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para04">04</span><span class="standard">The abbreviations shown in <a href="#table1D03">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-3</span><span class="text_added">1D-3</span></a> shall not be used in connection with traffic control devices because of their potential to be misinterpreted by road users.</span></p>

    <table border="0" cellpadding="2" dir="ltr" cellspacing="0" summary="List of abbreviations not to use" id="table1D03">
      <caption>Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-3</span><span class="text_added">1D-3</span>. Unacceptable Abbreviations</caption>

      <thead>
        <tr bgcolor="#EDD5DB">
          <th class="tablecell-top-left-cell" scope="col">
            Abbreviation
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-toprow" scope="col">
            Intended Word
          </th>

          <th class="tablecell-top-right-cell" scope="col">
            Common Misinterpretations
          </th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            ACC
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Accident
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Access (Road)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            CLRS
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Clears
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Colors
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            DLY
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Delay
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Daily
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            FDR
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Feeder
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Federal
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            L
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Left
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Lane (Merge)
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            LT
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Light (Traffic)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Left
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            PARK
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Parking
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Park
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            POLL
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Pollution (Index)
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Poll
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            RED
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Reduce
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Red
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-leftcolumn">
            STAD
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-interior">
            Stadium
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-rightcolumn">
            Standard
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td class="tablecell-bottom-left-cell">
            WRNG
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottomrow">
            Warning
          </td>

          <td class="tablecell-bottom-right-cell">
            Wrong
          </td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para05">05</span><span class="guidance">If <span class="text_deleted">multiple abbreviations are permitted in </span><a href="#table1D01">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-1</span><span class="text_added">1D-1</span></a> or <a href="#table1D02"><span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a><span class="text_added"> indicates that more than one abbreviation is permitted for a given word or phrase</span>, the same abbreviation should be used throughout a single jurisdiction.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D08_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Except as otherwise provided in <a href="#table1D01">Table <span class="text_deleted">1A-1</span><span class="text_added">1D-1</span></a> or <a href="#table1D02"><span class="text_deleted">1A-2</span><span class="text_added">1D-2</span></a> or unless necessary to avoid confusion, periods, commas, apostrophes, question marks, ampersands, and other punctuation marks or characters that are not letters or numerals should not be used in any abbreviation.</span></p>


    <h3 id="section1D09">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.04</span><span class="text_added">1D.09</span> Placement and Operation of Traffic Control Devices</h3>
	<div class="npa">
	<p>28. In Section 1D.11 (existing Section 1A.04) Placement and Operation of Traffic Control Devices, FHWA proposes to add a Standard statement that, before any new highway, site roadway open to public travel, detour, or temporary route is opened to public travel, all necessary traffic control devices shall be in place. FHWA proposes this revision to consolidate similar Guidance text in existing Section 3A.01 regarding markings and similar Standard text in existing Section 6B.01 regarding signs, and because it is important that all necessary traffic control devices be in place before new roads, detours, or temporary routes are opened to public travel.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The section is adopted as Section 1D.09.  The added Standard statement is adopted as proposed, except that “necessary” is revised to “necessary for safe operation”, for clarification of intent.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">Several commenters requested that this Standard be  adopted  as  Guidance  instead,  stating that placement of all permanent traffic control devices on a roadway prior to opening to general traffic is not always feasible or necessary. This requested change to Guidance is not adopted. Instead, an Option statement is added to allow temporary traffic control devices per Part 6 to be used in place of permanent devices that have yet to be installed.</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label"><span class="text_added">Standard:</span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">Before any <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">new </span>highway, <span class="text_deleted">private road</span><span class="text_added">site roadway</span> open to public travel (see definition in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.02</span></a>), <span class="text_deleted">paved </span>detour, or temporary route is opened to public travel, all <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">necessary </span><span class="text_deleted">markings</span><span class="text_added">traffic control devices</span> <span class="text_added change_from_npa">necessary for safe operation </span><span class="text_deleted">should</span><span class="text_added">shall</span> be in place.</span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para02">02</span><span class="option">Temporary traffic control devices, as provided for in Part 6 of this Manual, may be used in place of permanent devices that have yet to be installed for safe operation.</span></p>
	</span>
	</div>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">Placement of a traffic control device should be within the road user’s view so that adequate visibility is provided. To aid in conveying the proper meaning, the traffic control device should be appropriately positioned with respect to the location, object, or situation to which it applies. The location and legibility of the traffic control device should be such that a road user has adequate time to make the proper response in both day and night conditions.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para04">04</span><span class="guidance">Traffic control devices should be placed and operated in a uniform and consistent manner<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> as part of maintaining uniformity in traffic control</span>.</span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa">
	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para05">05</span><span class="support">Inconsistent placement or use of a device can result in disrespect for the device at locations where the device is needed and appropriate.</span></p>
	</span>
	</div>

    <p><span class="text_added change_from_npa"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para06">06</span><span class="guidance">Unnecessary traffic control devices should be removed. The fact that a device is in good physical condition should not be a basis for deferring needed removal or change.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D09_para07">07</span><span class="support"><a href="part2a.xhtml#section2A02">Section 2A.02</a> contains information on excessive use of signs and other considerations that can reduce their effectiveness and the effectiveness of other traffic control devices.</span></p></span>

    <h3 id="section1D10">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.05</span><span class="text_added">1D.10</span> Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>New Section 1D.10 Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices (not discussed in NPA Preamble)</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">A new Section 1D.10 titled Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices is adopted, with existing text that was Section 1A.05 of the 2009 MUTCD and that was proposed in the NPA without any changes as Section 1D.12.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D10_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Functional maintenance of traffic control devices should be used to determine if certain devices need to be changed to meet current traffic conditions.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section1D10_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">Physical maintenance of traffic control devices should be performed to retain the legibility and visibility of the device, and to retain the proper functioning of the device.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D10_para03">03</span><span class="support">Clean, legible, properly mounted devices in good working condition command the respect of road users.</span></p>

	<div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">
	<h3 id="section1D11">Section 1D.11 Crashworthiness of Traffic Control Devices and Other Roadside Appurtenances</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>New Section 1D.11 Crashworthiness of Traffic Control Devices and Other Roadside Appurtenances (not discussed in the Preamble)</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">A new Section 1D.11 titled Crashworthiness of Traffic Control Devices and Other Roadside Appurtenances,  with  text  relocated  from  Section
6A.04 and 1C.02, is adopted, based on a recommendation from commenters.   The Section
1C.02 definition of “crashworthy” extended beyond what would be considered a definition and includes material  that  warrants  discussion  in  a  separate
Section. The new Section 1D.11 includes language
from Section 6A.04 that has been revised from Support to Standard, and includes a Support statement adapted from the proposed definition of “crashworthy,” but with the word “barricades” deleted from the list of devices that are not traffic control devices, as barricades are traffic control devices.
</p>
	</div>

	<p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D11_para01">01</span> <span class="standard">In accordance with various Sections of this Manual, certain traffic control devices and their supports, and/or related appurtenances shall be crashworthy (see definition in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a>). Crashworthiness provisions in this Manual shall apply to all streets, highways, and site roadways open to public travel.</span></p>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section1D11_para02">02</span><span class="support">Roadside appurtenances include permanent and portable sign supports, other permanent or temporary traffic control devices, and other roadside fixtures that are not traffic control devices, such as longitudinal barriers, bridge railings, and crash cushions, within the clear zone. Crashworthiness of a device or appurtenance is determined by nationally established standards such as the "Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware" (MASH), 2016, AASHTO. Information on the FHWA's policy on crashworthiness of devices on the National Highway System and other roadways is available at the FHWA Office of Safety Web site at <a href="https://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/roadway_dept/countermeasures/reduce_crash_severity/policy_memo_guidance.cfm">https://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/roadway_dept/countermeasures/reduce_crash_severity/policy_memo_guidance.cfm</a></span></p>
	</span></div>

  </div>
</body>
</html>