<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 6A - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter 6A. General</h1>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>461. FHWA proposes to reorganize Part 6 by dividing some existing long chapters and sections into several chapters and/or several sections, each having a clearly understandable title, and by moving certain material to new locations within Part 6 to consolidate similar information in one place. In some cases, this involves the proposed creation of new Chapters and Sections that do not exist in the 2009 MUTCD.</p>
	<p>In addition, FHWA proposes to delete text from various sections where such material duplicates or is very similar to existing text in other sections within Part 6 or elsewhere in the MUTCD. These reorganizations and elimination of redundancies are editorial in nature and do not significantly change the technical content or meaning, except as otherwise discussed below.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The reorganization of Part 6 is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>462. Throughout Part 6, FHWA proposes to make various editorial revisions to eliminate the use of unacceptably vague and undefined terms, such as
“reasonably safe,” replacing such phrases with more appropriate language.
</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">These editorial revisions throughout Part 6 are adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>463. FHWA is proposing to revise several Guidance statements related to sidewalk closure during construction and accessible pedestrian access. Under Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), all State and local governments are required to take appropriate steps to ensure that their communications with people with disabilities are as effective as communications with others. [28 CFR
35.160(a)]. Effective communication means that whatever information is conveyed by or on behalf of a public entity must be as clear and understandable to people with disabilities as it is for people who do not have disabilities. The ADA requires public entities to furnish auxiliary aids and services—which include the acquisition or modification of equipment or devices— where necessary to afford individuals with disabilities an equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, a service, program, or activity of a public entity. [28 CFR 35.160(b)(1)]. The provision of pedestrian facilities in the public right-of-way is generally recognized as a service provided by the public entity that owns such facilities. See, e.g., Barden v. City of Sacramento, 292 F.3d 1073 (9th Cir.
2002). When sidewalks are closed temporarily due to construction, it is important for the closure to be communicated to pedestrians in a manner that is accessible to pedestrians with vision loss.
</p>
	<p>FHWA proposes to strengthen the language in Part 6 to address this need. Under Title II of the ADA, all State and local governments must operate services, programs, and activities, including pedestrian facilities in public street rights-of-way, such that, when viewed in their entirety, they are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. The ADA requires that a public entity’s newly constructed facilities be made accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities to the extent that it is not structurally impracticable to do so. The ADA also requires that, when an existing facility is altered, the altered facility be made accessible and usable by individuals with disabilities to the maximum extent feasible. Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, generally referred to as Section 504, includes similar requirements for public entities that receive Federal financial assistance.</p>
	<p>FHWA proposes to eliminate text that refers to a level of usage by pedestrians with disabilities as a basis for taking certain accessibility-related actions because the need to comply with the ADA does not depend on the frequency with which the facility is used by pedestrians with disabilities. FHWA also proposes to eliminate text suggesting that the accommodation of pedestrians with disabilities is sometimes unnecessary.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">See Preamble of Federal Register for discussion of this item.</p>
	</div>

	<div class="fr">
	<h4>Accessibility</h4>

	<p>In Part 6, FHWA proposed to add a new requirement in accordance with 28 CFR 35.160(a)(1) to take appropriate steps to ensure that communications with applicants, participants, members of the public, and companions with disabilities are as effective as communications with others. In addition, FHWA proposed to revise several Standards to remove text related to “where pedestrians with disabilities normally use” or “where it is determined that the accommodations of pedestrians with disabilities is necessary” to strengthen requirements for accessible features and remove ambiguity on when they should be implemented. The proposed changes in Part 6 were slightly broader than proposed changes in Part 4 because changes for temporary traffic control devices are easier for agencies to adopt since the devices are temporary and are purchased and installed as part of an active construction or maintenance project.</p>

	<p>The FHWA received a large number of comments related to the proposed changes encouraging the incorporation of PROWAG and to strengthen accessibility requirements. The comments stated that FHWA should adopt positions of greatly increased accessibility requirements similar to what was anticipated in the final rule for PROWAG. Other commenters, including many State DOTs and local agencies opposed significant accessibility changes based on their concerns with the cost impact and the significant level of effort to implement widescale increased accessibility measures, especially if there was not a demonstrated need for such accommodations at a specific location. The FHWA notes that at the time of publication of the NPA, the U.S. Access Board had not concluded its rulemaking and the provisions of a potential final rule were unknown. The U.S. Access Board has since finalized its rulemaking process for PROWAG (88 FR 53604, August 8, 2023; effective date September 7, 20203). Therefore, FHWA did not have the opportunity to seek public comment on adopting the provisions of the PROWAG final rule during the course of this rulemaking. As such, FHWA only adopts the proposed NPA revisions that strengthen the provisions for the protection of vulnerable users, consistent with section 11135 of BIL. The FHWA anticipates the MUTCD undergoing further rulemaking to address sections affected by the final PROWAG. In the meantime, DOT has initiated a rulemaking to incorporate the PROWAG into the ADA regulations of the Office of the Secretary of Transportation.</p>
	</div>

    <h3 id="section6A01">Section 6A.01 General</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>464. In conjunction with the elimination of existing Part 5 Low-Volume Rural Roads, FHWA proposes to add a new Support paragraph in Section 6A.01 General regarding temporary traffic controls on low volume rural roads.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The new Support paragraph is adopted as proposed, except the word "rural" is deleted in response to a comment, and other revisions are made to the first sentence in response to a comment from a municipality. The changes to existing Paragraph 10 are adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes to change the last two sentences of existing P10 from Standard to Guidance, to make this information regarding statutory authority to be consistent with similar information in Part 1.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The changes are adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Whenever the acronym “TTC” is used in Part 6, it refers to “temporary traffic control.”</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para02">02</span><span class="standard">The needs and control of all road users (motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians within the highway, or on <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added"><span class="text_added change_from_npa">a </span>site roadway<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span></span> open to public travel (see definition in <a href="part1c.xhtml#section1C02">Section <span class="text_deleted">1A.13</span><span class="text_added">1C.02</span></a>), including persons with disabilities<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), Title II</span><span class="text_deleted">, Paragraph 35.130</span>) through a TTC zone shall be an essential part of highway construction, utility work, maintenance operations, and the management of traffic incidents.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para03">03</span><span class="support">When the normal function of the roadway, or a <span class="text_deleted">private road</span><span class="text_added">site roadway</span> open to public travel, is suspended, TTC planning provides for continuity of the movement of motor vehicle, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic (including accessible passage); transit operations; and access (and accessibility) to property and utilities.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para04">04</span><span class="support">The primary function of TTC is to <span class="text_deleted">provide for the reasonably safe and effective</span><span class="text_added">facilitate</span> movement of road users through or around TTC zones while <span class="text_deleted">reasonably </span>protecting road users, workers, responders to traffic incidents, and equipment.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para05">05</span><span class="support">Of equal importance to the public traveling through the TTC zone is the safety of workers performing the many varied tasks within the work space. TTC zones present constantly changing conditions that are unexpected by the road user. This creates an even higher degree of vulnerability for the workers and incident management responders on or near the roadway (see <a href="part6c.xhtml#section6C04">Section <span class="text_deleted">6D.03</span><span class="text_added">6C.04</span></a>). At the same time, the TTC zone provides for the efficient completion of whatever activity interrupted the normal use of the roadway.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para06">06</span><span class="support">Consideration for road user safety, worker and responder safety, and the efficiency of road user flow is an integral element of every TTC zone, from planning through completion. A concurrent objective of the TTC is the efficient construction and maintenance of the highway and the efficient resolution of traffic incidents.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para07">07</span><span class="support">No one set of TTC devices can satisfy all conditions for a given project or incident. At the same time, defining details that would be adequate to cover all applications is <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">not practical</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">impractical</span>. Instead, Part 6 displays typical applications that depict common applications of TTC devices. The TTC selected for each situation depends on <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the </span>type of highway, road user conditions, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">the </span>duration of operation, physical constraints, and the nearness of the work space or incident management activity to road users.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para08">08</span><span class="support">The <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">temporary traffic control</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">TTC needs</span> for low-volume <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">rural </span>and special purpose roads will <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">generally</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">sometimes</span> be minimal, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">recognizing the</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">especially for shorter-term durations and</span> lower speed<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s and traffic volumes</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> roads</span>. <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">A</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">The use of maintenance vehicle flashers, a</span> limited number of signs, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">maintenance vehicle warning flashers, </span>or a single flagger could be adequate for <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">most</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">these</span> situations.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para09">09</span><span class="support">Improved road user performance might be realized through a well-prepared public relations effort that covers the nature of the work, the time and duration of its execution, the anticipated effects upon road users, and possible alternate routes and modes of travel. Such programs have been found to result in a significant reduction in the number of road users traveling through the TTC zone, which reduces the possible number of conflicts.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para10">10</span><span class="support">Operational improvements might be realized by using intelligent transportation systems (ITS) in work zones. The use in work zones of ITS technology, such as portable camera systems, highway advisory radio, variable speed limits, ramp metering, traveler information, merge guidance, <span class="text_added">warning systems for vehicles exiting the work space<span class="text_added change_from_npa">,</span> </span>and queue detection information, is aimed at increasing safety for both workers and road users and helping to ensure a more efficient traffic flow. The use in work zones of ITS technologies has been found to be effective in providing traffic monitoring and management, data collection, and traveler information.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para11">11</span><span class="standard">TTC plans and devices shall be the responsibility of the <span class="text_deleted">authority of a </span>public body or official <span class="text_added">or the owners of site roadways open to public travel </span>having jurisdiction for guiding road users.</span></p>

	<p><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para12">12</span><span class="guidance">There <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be adequate statutory authority for the implementation and enforcement of needed road user regulations, parking controls, speed zoning, and the management of traffic incidents. Such statutes <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> provide sufficient flexibility in the application of TTC to meet the needs of changing conditions in the TTC zone.</span></p>

    <span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Temporary facilities, including pedestrian routes around worksites, are also covered by the accessibility requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) (Public Law 101-336, 104 Stat. 327, July 26, 1990. 42 U.S.C. 12101-12213 (as amended)).</span></p></span>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para13">13</span><span class="support">The provisions of Part 6 apply to both rural and urban areas. A rural highway is normally characterized by lower volumes, higher speeds, fewer turning conflicts, and less conflict with pedestrians<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> or other vulnerable road users</span>. An urban street is typically characterized by relatively low speeds, wide ranges of road user volumes, narrower roadway lanes, frequent intersections and driveways, significant <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">pedestrian</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vulnerable road user</span> activity, and more businesses and houses.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para14">14</span><span class="support">The determination as to whether a particular facility at a particular time of day can be considered to be a high-volume roadway or can be considered to be a low-volume roadway is made by the public agency or official having jurisdiction.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6A01_para15">15</span><span class="support">Special plans preparation and coordination with transit, other highway agencies, law enforcement and other emergency units, utilities, schools, <span class="text_added">trucking associations </span>and railroad companies might be needed to reduce unexpected and unusual road user operation situations.</span></p>

	<h3 id="section6A02">Section <span class="text_deleted">6B.01</span><span class="text_added">6A.02</span> Fundamental Principles of Temporary Traffic Control</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>465. In Section 6A.02 (existing Section 6B.01) Fundamental Principles of Temporary Traffic Control, FHWA proposes to add information on the spacing and number of signs in the advance warning area in order to address excessive queue lengths based on the findings of NTSB/HAR–15/02 Multivehicle Work Zone Crash I–95 Cranbury, New Jersey (<a href="https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/Pages/HWY14MH012.aspx">https://ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/har1502.aspx</a>).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The added information regarding the spacing and number of signs that was proposed to be added to this section is deleted because the same wording is being added in Section 6N.13 where it is more appropriate.</p>

	<p>FHWA proposes to clarify the language in the Guidance statement of paragraph 7 parts 3A and 3B pertaining to pedestrian accessibility in accordance with 28 CFR 35.160(a)(1), which requires a public entity to take appropriate steps to ensure that communications with applicants, participants, members of the public, and companions with disabilities are as effective as communications with others.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The changes are adopted as proposed, except that the numbering of items in Paragraph 7 is restructured. The revised items are adopted as items C.1 and C.2</p>
	</div>

    <span class="text_deleted">
	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="support">Construction, maintenance, utility, and incident zones can all benefit from TTC to compensate for the unexpected or unusual situations faced by road users. When planning for TTC in these zones, it can be assumed that it is appropriate for road users to exercise caution. Even though road users are assumed to be using caution, special care is still needed in applying TTC techniques.</span></p> 
	</span>

    <div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><p><span class="support">Experience has shown that following the fundamental principles of Part 6 will assist road users and help protect workers in the vicinity of TTC zones.</span></p></span></div>

	<p><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard">Before any new detour or temporary route is opened to traffic, all necessary signs shall be in place.</span></span></p>

    <div class="change_from_npa"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><p><span class="standard">All TTC devices shall be removed as soon as practical when they are no longer needed. When work is suspended for short periods of time, TTC devices that are no longer appropriate shall be removed or covered.</span></p></span></div>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A02_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Road user and worker safety and accessibility in TTC zones should be an integral and high-priority element of every project from planning through design and construction. Similarly, maintenance and utility work should be planned and conducted with the safety and accessibility of all motorists, bicyclists, pedestrians (including those with disabilities), and workers being considered at all times. If the TTC zone includes a grade crossing, early coordination with the railroad company or light rail transit agency should take place.</span></p>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> </span><span class="paranum" id="section6A02_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">The following are the seven fundamental principles of TTC:</span></p>

    <ol class="guidance">
      <li>General plans or guidelines should be developed to provide safety for motorists, bicyclists, pedestrians, workers, enforcement/emergency officials, and equipment, with the following factors being considered: 

      <ol type="A">
        <li>The basic safety principles governing the design of permanent roadways and roadsides should also govern the design of TTC zones. The goal should be to route road users through such zones using roadway geometrics, roadside features, and TTC devices as nearly as possible comparable to those for normal highway situations.</li>

        <li>A TTC plan, in detail appropriate to the complexity of the work project or incident, should be prepared and understood by all responsible parties before the site is occupied. Any changes in the TTC plan should be approved by an official who is knowledgeable (for example, trained and/or certified) in proper TTC practices.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Road user movement should be inhibited as little as practical, based on the following considerations: 

      <ol type="A">
        <li>TTC at work and incident sites should be designed on the assumption that drivers will only reduce their speeds if they clearly perceive a need to do so (see <a href="part6b.xhtml#section6B01">Section 6<span class="text_deleted">C</span><span class="text_added">B</span>.01</a>).</li>

        <li>Frequent and abrupt changes in geometrics such as lane narrowing, dropped lanes, or main roadway transitions that require rapid maneuvers, should be avoided.</li>

        <li>Work should be scheduled in a manner that minimizes the need for lane closures or alternate routes, while still getting the work completed quickly and the lanes or roadway open to traffic as soon as possible.</li>

        <li>Attempts should be made to reduce the volume of traffic using the roadway or freeway to match the restricted capacity conditions. Road users should be encouraged to use alternative routes. <span class="text_added">When the roadway capacity is reduced <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">due to the</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">because of</span> lane closure<span class="text_added change_from_npa">s</span>, the demand <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">will</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">could</span> exceed the available capacity<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> and</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, which might</span> result in either a lengthy stopped or slow moving queue of vehicles that <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">may</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">might</span> extend past the normal <span class="text_added change_from_npa">location of </span>signs shown in the typical advance warning area. An assessment of the expected queue length<span class="text_added change_from_npa">, which</span> should be a part of the <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">temporary traffic control</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">TTC</span> plan design process<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> and</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">, might result in</span> adjustments to the sign spacing and number of signs as well as the <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">possibility of using</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">use of</span> more conspicuous devices <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">may be provided </span>to increase the distance and conspicuity of the advance warning area. </span>For high-volume roadways and freeways, the closure of selected entrance ramps or other access points and the use of signed diversion routes should be evaluated.</li>

        <li>Bicyclists and pedestrians, including those with disabilities, should be provided with access and <span class="text_deleted">reasonably safe </span>passage through the TTC zone.</li>

        <li>If work operations permit, lane closures on high-volume streets and highways should be scheduled during off-peak hours. Night work should be considered if the work can be accomplished with a series of short-term operations.</li>

        <li>Early coordination with officials having jurisdiction over the affected cross streets and providing emergency services should occur if significant impacts to roadway operations are anticipated.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians should be guided in a clear and positive manner while approaching and traversing TTC zones and incident sites. The following principles should be applied: 

      <ol type="A">
        <li>Adequate warning, delineation, and channelization should be provided to assist in guiding road users in advance of and through the TTC zone or incident site by using proper pavement marking, signing, or other devices that are effective under varying conditions. <span class="text_deleted">Providing i</span><span class="text_added">I</span>nformation <span class="text_deleted">that is in</span><span class="text_added">should be provided in</span> usable formats <span class="text_deleted">by</span><span class="text_added">for</span> pedestrians with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vision</span> disabilities<span class="text_deleted"> should also be considered</span>.</li>

        <li>TTC devices inconsistent with intended travel paths through TTC zones should be removed or covered. However, in intermediate-term stationary, short-term, and mobile operations, where visible permanent devices are inconsistent with intended travel paths, devices that highlight or emphasize the appropriate path should be used. <span class="text_deleted">Providing t</span><span class="text_added">T</span>raffic control devices <span class="text_deleted">that are accessible to and usable by pedestrians with disabilities should be considered</span><span class="text_added">should provide information in usable formats for pedestrians with <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">visual</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">vision</span> disabilities</span>.</li>

        <li>Flagging procedures, when used, should provide positive guidance to road users traversing the TTC zone.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>To provide acceptable levels of operations, routine day and night inspections of TTC elements should be performed as follows: 

      <ol type="A">
        <li>Individuals who are knowledgeable (for example, trained and/or certified) in the principles of proper TTC should be assigned responsibility for safety in TTC zones. The most important duty of these individuals <span class="text_deleted">should be</span><span class="text_added">is</span> to check that <span class="text_deleted">all </span>TTC devices <span class="text_deleted">of</span><span class="text_added">on</span> the project are consistent with the TTC plan and are effective for motorists, bicyclists, pedestrians, and workers.</li>

        <li>As the work progresses, temporary traffic controls and/or working conditions should be modified, <span class="text_deleted">if appropriate</span><span class="text_added">as needed</span>, <span class="text_deleted">in order </span>to <span class="text_deleted">provide mobility and positive guidance to the</span><span class="text_added">facilitate</span> road user <span class="text_added">movement </span>and <span class="text_deleted">to </span>provide worker safety. The individual responsible for TTC should have the authority to halt work until applicable or remedial safety measures are taken.</li>

        <li>TTC zones should be carefully monitored under varying conditions of road user volumes, light, and weather to check that applicable TTC devices are effective, clearly visible, clean, and in compliance with the TTC plan.</li>

        <li>When warranted, an engineering study should be made (in cooperation with law enforcement officials) of reported crashes occurring within the TTC zone. Crash records in TTC zones should be monitored to identify the need for changes in the TTC zone.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Attention should be given to the maintenance of roadside safety during the life of the TTC zone by applying the following principles: 

      <ol type="A">
        <li>To accommodate run-off-the-road incidents, disabled vehicles, or emergency situations, unencumbered roadside recovery areas or clear zones should be provided where practical.</li>

        <li>Channelization of road users should be accomplished by the use of pavement markings, signing, and crashworthy, detectable channelizing devices.</li>

        <li>Work equipment, workers’ private vehicles, materials, and debris should be stored in such a manner to reduce the probability of being impacted by run-off-the-road vehicles.</li>
      </ol></li>

      <li>Each person whose actions affect TTC zone safety, from the upper-level management through the field workers, should receive training appropriate to the job decisions each individual is required to make. Only those individuals who are trained in proper TTC practices and have a basic understanding of the principles (established by applicable standards and guidelines, including those of this Manual) should supervise the selection, placement, and maintenance of TTC devices used for TTC zones and for incident management.</li>

      <li>Good public relations should be maintained by applying the following principles: 

      <ol type="A">
        <li>The needs of all road users should be assessed such that appropriate advance notice is given and clearly defined alternative paths are provided.</li>

        <li>The cooperation of the various news media should be sought in publicizing the existence of and reasons for TTC zones because news releases can assist in keeping the road users well informed.</li>

        <li>The needs of abutting property owners, residents, and businesses should be assessed and appropriate accommodations made.</li>

        <li>The needs of emergency service providers (law enforcement, fire, and medical) should be assessed and appropriate coordination and accommodations made.</li>

        <li>The needs of railroads and transit should be assessed and appropriate coordination and accommodations made.</li>

        <li>The needs of operators of commercial vehicles such as buses and large trucks should be assessed and appropriate accommodations made.</li>

		<span class="text_added">
			<li>Early coordination should occur with school officials to discuss potential impacts on picking up and dropping off schoolchildren, on school bus routing, and on safe routes to school patterns.</li>
		</span>
      </ol></li>
    </ol>

    <h3 id="section6A03">Section <span class="text_deleted">6F.01</span><span class="text_added">6A.03</span> <span class="text_deleted">Types of</span><span class="text_added">TTC</span> Devices</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>FHWA proposes to divide existing Section 6F.01 Types of TTC Devices into two new sections, 6A.03 “TTC Devices” and 6A.04 “Crashworthiness of TTC Devices.”</p>
	<p>FHWA proposes to revise the Standard paragraph in new Section 6A.03 defining “traffic control devices” and the Support paragraph in Section 6A.04 regarding crashworthiness to be consistent with the revised definitions proposed for these terms in Part 1.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The second Standard in Section 6A.03 is clarified to include TTC devices on pedestrian facilities, bikeways, and pathways as a result of comments received. The remaining changes are adopted as proposed, except that a cross reference to the definition of “crashworthy” in Section 1C.02 is added in Section 6A.04.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A03_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">The design and application of TTC devices used in TTC zones should consider the needs of all road users (motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians), including those with disabilities.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section6A03_para02">02</span><span class="standard">Traffic control devices shall be defined as all signs, signals, markings, <span class="text_added">channelizing devices, or</span><span class="text_deleted">and</span> other devices <span class="text_added">that </span>use<span class="text_deleted">d</span><span class="text_added"> colors, shapes, symbols, words, sounds, or tactile information for the primary purpose of communicating a</span> <span class="text_deleted">to </span>regulat<span class="text_deleted">e</span><span class="text_added">ory</span>, warn<span class="text_added">ing</span>, or guid<span class="text_deleted">e</span><span class="text_added">ance message to</span> road users<span class="text_deleted">, placed</span> on<span class="text_deleted">, over, or adjacent to</span> a street, highway, <span class="text_added">pedestrian facility, bikeway, pathway, or </span><span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadway<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">s</span></span> open to public travel<span class="text_deleted"> (see definition in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A13">Section 1A.13</a>), pedestrian facility, or bikeway by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction</span>.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">All traffic control devices used for construction, maintenance, utility, or incident management operations on a street, highway, <span class="text_added change_from_npa">pedestrian facility, bikeway, pathway, </span>or <span class="text_deleted">private road</span><span class="text_added">site roadways</span> open to public travel <span class="text_deleted">(see definition in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A13">Section 1A.13</a>) </span>shall comply with the applicable provisions of this Manual.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6A03_para04">04</span><span class="standard"><span class="text_added change_from_npa"> All TTC devices shall be removed as soon as practical when they are no longer needed. When work is suspended for short periods of time, TTC devices that are no longer appropriate shall be removed or covered.</span></span></p>

	<span class="text_added"><h3 id="section6A04">Section 6A.04 Crashworthiness of TTC Devices</h3></span>

	<p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="text_deleted"><span class="support">FHWA policy requires that all roadside appurtenances such as traffic barriers, barrier terminals and crash cushions, bridge railings, sign and light pole supports, and work zone hardware used on the National Highway System meet the crashworthy performance criteria contained in the National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) Report 350, “Recommended Procedures for the Safety Performance Evaluation of Highway Features.” The FHWA website at “http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/programs/roadside_hardware.htm” identifies all such hardware and includes copies of FHWA acceptance letters for each of them. In the case of proprietary items, links are provided to manufacturers’ websites as a source of detailed information on specific devices. The website also contains an “Ask the Experts” section where questions on roadside design issues can be addressed.</span></span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6A04_para01">01</span><span class="support">Various Sections of the MUTCD require certain traffic control devices, their supports, and/or related appurtenances to be crashworthy<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> (see definition in <a href ="part1d.xhtml#section1C02">Section 1C.02</a>)</span>. Such MUTCD crashworthiness provisions apply to all streets, highways, and <span class="text_deleted">private roads</span><span class="text_added">site roadways</span> open to public travel.<span class="text_deleted"> Also, State Departments of Transportation and local agencies might have expanded the NCHRP Report 350 crashworthy criteria to apply to certain other roadside appurtenances.</span></span></p>

	<span class="text_deleted"><p><span class="support">Crashworthiness and crash testing information on devices described in Part 6 are found in AASHTO’s “Roadside Design Guide” (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>).</span></p>

    <p><span class="support">As defined in <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A13">Section 1A.13</a>, “crashworthy” is a characteristic of a roadside appurtenance that has been successfully crash tested in accordance with a national standard such as the NCHRP Report 350, “Recommended Procedures for the Safety Performance Evaluation of Highway Features.”</span></p></span>

	<span class="text_added"><h3 id="section6A05">Section 6A.05 Night Work</h3></span>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6A05_para01">01</span><span class="support">Conducting highway construction and maintenance activities during night hours could provide an advantage when traditional daytime traffic control strategies cannot achieve an acceptable balance between worker and public safety, traffic and community impact, and constructability. The two basic advantages of working at night are reduced traffic congestion and less involvement with business activities. However, the two basic conditions that must normally be met for night work to offer any advantage are reduced traffic volumes and easy set up and removal of the traffic control patterns on a nightly basis.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A05_para02">02</span><span class="support">Shifting work activities to night hours, when traffic volumes are lower and normal business is less active, might offer an advantage in some cases, as long as the necessary work can be completed and the worksite restored to essentially normal operating conditions to carry the higher traffic volume during non-construction hours.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A05_para03">03</span><span class="support">Although working at night might offer advantages, it also includes safety issues. Reduced visibility inherent in night work impacts the performance of both drivers and workers. Because traffic volumes are lower and congestion is minimized, speeds are often higher at night necessitating greater visibility at a time when visibility is reduced. Finally, the incidence of impaired (alcohol or drugs), fatigued, or drowsy drivers might be higher at night.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section6A05_para04">04</span><span class="support">Working at night also involves other factors, including construction productivity and quality, social impacts, economics, and environmental issues. A decision to perform construction or maintenance activities at night normally involves some consideration of the advantages to be gained compared to the safety and other issues that might be impacted.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section6A05_para05">05</span><span class="support"><span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">See </span><a href="part6n.xhtml#section6N18">Section 6N.18</a> <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">for</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">contains</span> specific provisions on TTC for work during nighttime hours.</span></p>
	</span>

	<span class="text_deleted"><h1>Chapter 6B. Fundamental Principles</h1></span>
  </div>
</body>
</html>