<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <title>Chapter 4P - MUTCD 11th Edition (2023) - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
  <div id="content">
    <h1>Chapter <span class="text_deleted">4I</span><span class="text_added">4P</span>. Traffic Control Signals for Freeway Entrance Ramps</h1>

    <h3 id="section4P01">Section <span class="text_deleted">4I.01</span><span class="text_added">4P.01</span> Application of Freeway Entrance Ramp Control Signals</h3>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P01_para01">01</span><span class="support">Ramp control signals are traffic control signals that control the flow of traffic entering the freeway facility. This is often referred to as “ramp metering.”</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P01_para02">02</span><span class="support">Freeway entrance ramp control signals are sometimes used if controlling traffic entering the freeway could reduce the total expected delay to traffic in the freeway corridor, including freeway ramps and local streets.</span></p>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P01_para03">03</span><span class="guidance">The installation of ramp control signals should be preceded by an engineering study of the physical and traffic conditions on the highway facilities likely to be affected. The study should include the ramps and ramp connections and the surface streets that would be affected by the ramp control, as well as the freeway section concerned.</span></p>

    <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P01_para04">04</span><span class="support">Information on conditions that might justify freeway entrance ramp control signals, factors to be evaluated in traffic engineering studies for ramp control signals, design of ramp control signals, and operation of ramp control signals can be found in the FHWA’s “Ramp Management and Control Handbook<span class="text_added change_from_npa">.</span>”<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> (see <a href="part1a.xhtml#section1A05">Section 1A.<span class="text_added">05</span><span class="text_deleted">11</span></a>).</span></span></p>

    <h3 id="section4P02">Section <span class="text_deleted">4I.02</span><span class="text_added">4P.02</span> Design of Freeway Entrance Ramp Control Signals</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>435. In Section 4P.02 (existing Section 4I.02) Design of Freeway Entrance Ramp Control Signals, FHWA proposes to reorder the paragraphs and revise existing P3 to clarify that a minimum of two signal faces shall be provided on ramps that have one controlled lane as well as ramps that have more than one controlled lane and the ramp control signals are operated such that green signal indications are always displayed simultaneously to all of the controlled lanes on the ramp.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>For locations where there is more than one lane on an entrance ramp and the ramp control signals are not operated such that the green signal indications are always displayed simultaneously, FHWA proposes to split the requirements between two-lane entrance ramps and entrance ramps with three or more lanes. For two-lane entrance ramps that are separately controlled, at least two ramp control signals shall be provided for each lane. For three or more entrance ramp lanes that are separately controlled, one ramp control signal shall be provided over the approximate center of each lane. FHWA proposes these changes in accordance with Official Ruling No. 4(09)–6(I) (http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/ resources/interpretations/4_09_6.htm).</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">FHWA received comments that noted concerns with the additional signal faces the proposed NPA would require. Further, the commenters noted the safety risk is minimal if a signal indication was burnt out because the ramp would operate as they typically do without ramp control signals. Based on these comments, the proposed NPA revisions for two controlled lanes entrance ramps is not adopted, but the new Standard for three or more controlled lane entrance ramps is adopted.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes a new Option to expand the existing exception to the requirement of 8-foot minimum lateral separation of signal faces for one- lane entrance ramps to apply to entrance ramps with two or more controlled lanes. FHWA proposes this change for consistency with single-lane ramps.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>

	<p>Further, FHWA proposes to change P6 from Standard to Guidance to provide agencies additional flexibility in the location and design of ramp control signals.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed.</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para01">01</span><span class="standard">Ramp control signals shall meet all of the standard design specifications for traffic control signals, except as otherwise provided in this Section.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para02">02</span><span class="standard">The signal face for freeway entrance ramp control signals shall be either a two-section signal face containing red and green signal indications or a three-section signal face containing red, yellow, and green signal indications.</span></p>

	 <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para03">03</span><span class="option">Ramp control signals may be placed in the dark mode (no indications displayed) when not in use.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para04">04</span><span class="option">Ramp control signals may be used to control some, but not all, lanes on a ramp, such as when non-metered HOV bypass lanes are provided on a ramp.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para05">05</span><span class="standard">If only one <span class="text_added">controlled </span>lane is present on an entrance ramp<span class="text_added">,</span> or if more than one <span class="text_added">controlled </span>lane is present on an entrance ramp and the ramp control signals are operated such that green signal indications are always displayed simultaneously to all of the <span class="text_added">controlled </span>lanes on the ramp, then a minimum of two signal faces per ramp shall face entering traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para06">06</span><span class="standard">If <span class="text_deleted">more than one lane is</span><span class="text_added">two controlled lanes are</span>  present on an entrance ramp and the ramp control signals are operated such that green signal indications are not always displayed simultaneously to <span class="text_deleted">all</span>both<span class="text_added"></span> of the <span class="text_added">controlled </span>lanes on the ramp, <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"><span class="text_added">a minimum of two signal faces shall be provided for each of the two lanes</span></span><span class="change_from_npa">then one signal face shall be provided over the approximate center of each separately-controlled lane</span>.</span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para07">07</span><span class="standard">If three or more controlled lanes are present on an entrance ramp and the ramp control signals are operated such that green signal indications are not always displayed simultaneously to all of the controlled lanes on the ramp, then one signal face shall be provided over the approximate center of each separately-controlled lane.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para08">08</span><span class="guidance">Additional side-mounted signal faces should be considered for ramps with <span class="text_deleted">two</span><span class="text_added">three</span> or more separately-controlled lanes.</span></p>

	<p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/><span class="text_deleted"><span class="paranum">09</span><span class="option">The required signal faces, if located at the side of the ramp roadway, may be mounted such that the height above the pavement grade at the center of the ramp roadway to the bottom of the signal housing of the lowest signal face is between 4.5 and 6 feet.</span></span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para09">09</span><span class="option">For entrance ramps with only one controlled lane, the two required signal faces may both be mounted at the side of the roadway on a single pole<span class="text_added"> (as a specific exception to the normal 8-foot minimum lateral separation of signal faces as required by <a href="part4d.xhtml#section4D07">Section 4D.07</a>)</span>, with <span class="text_deleted">one face at the normal mounting height and one</span><span class="text_added">the lower signal</span> face <span class="text_deleted">mounted </span><span class="text_added">installed at a minimum mounting height of 4.5 feet</span><span class="text_deleted">lower as provided in <a href="#section4P02_para09">Paragraph 9</a>, as a specific exception to the normal 8-foot minimum lateral separation of signal faces required by <a href="part4d.xhtml#section4D13">Section 4D.13.</a></span></span></p>

	<span class="text_added">
	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para10">10</span><span class="option">For entrance ramps with two or more controlled lanes, if two signal faces are installed for the right-hand land or for the left-hand lane, the two signal faces for that lane may both be mounted at the closest side of the roadway on a single pole (as a specific exception to the normal 8-foot minimum lateral separation of signal faces required by <a href="part4d.xhtml#section4D07">Section 4D.07</a>), with the lower signal face installed at a minimum mounting height of 4.5 feet.</span></p>
	</span>

    <p><span class="text_deleted"><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span></span><span class="text_added"><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para11">11</span><span class="guidance">Ramp control signals <span class="text_deleted">shall</span><span class="text_added">should</span> be located and designed to minimize their viewing by mainline freeway traffic.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para12">12</span><span class="guidance">Regulatory signs with legends appropriate to the control, such as XX Vehicle(S) Per Green or XX VEHICLE(S) PER GREEN Each Lane (see <a href="part2b.xhtml#section2B61">Section 2B.<span class="text_added">61</span><span class="text_deleted">56</span></a>), should be installed<span class="text_deleted"> adjacent to the ramp control signal faces</span>.</span></p>

	<p><span class="paranum" id="section4P02_para13">13</span><span class="guidance">When ramp control signals are installed on a freeway-to-freeway ramp, special consideration should be given to assuring adequate visibility of the ramp control signals, and multiple advance warning signs with flashing <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">w</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">W</span>arning <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">b</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">B</span>eacons should be installed to warn road users of the metered operation.</span></p>

    <h3 id="section4P03">Section <span class="text_deleted">4I.03</span><span class="text_added">4P.03</span> Operation of Freeway Entrance Ramp Control Signals</h3>

	<div class="npa">
	<p>436. In Section 4P.03 (existing 4I.03) Operation of Freeway Entrance Ramp Control Signals, FHWA proposes to revise Standard P3 to prohibit the use of flashing light emitting diode (LED) units within the legend or border of signs to inform road users that ramp control signal is in operation.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">The change is adopted as proposed with editorial revisions.</p>

	<p>FHWA also proposes similar revisions to Section
4S.03 (existing Section 4L.03) Warning Beacon and Section 4S.04 (existing Section 4L.04) Speed Limit Sign Beacon to prohibit the use of flashing LED units within the legend or border of signs to inform road users that a regulation is in effect or that a condition is present.
</p>

	<p>FHWA believes that warning beacons should be used to inform road users that a regulation is in effect and that flashing LED lights within the border or legend of the sign should only provide added conspicuity to sign legends.</p>
	<p class="fr-disp">FHWA adopts the prohibition of LED units in Speed Limit signs to inform road users that a speed limit is in effect. However, the prohibition was added as a Standard in Section 2A.12 rather than including it as a Standard in Section 4S.04 as proposed in the NPA. FHWA inadvertently left out a similar Standard for
4S.03 but did address this issue in a Support statement. The Support provision is adopted with editorial revisions.
</p>
	</div>

    <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P03_para01">01</span><span class="guidance">Operational strategies for ramp control signals, such as periods of operation, metering rates and algorithms, and queue management, should be determined by the operating agency prior to the installation of the ramp control signals and should be closely monitored and adjusted as needed thereafter.</span></p>

    <p><span class="paranum" id="section4P03_para02">02</span><span class="guidance">When the ramp control signals are operated only during certain periods of the day, a RAMP METERED WHEN FLASHING (W3-8) sign (see <a href="part2c.xhtml#section2C37">Section 2C.37</a>) should be installed in advance of the ramp control signal near the entrance to the ramp, or on the arterial on the approach to the ramp, to alert road users to the presence and operation of ramp meters.</span></p>

    <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/> <span class="paranum" id="section4P03_para03">03</span><span class="standard">The RAMP METERED WHEN FLASHING sign shall be supplemented with a <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">w</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">W</span>arning <span class="text_deleted change_from_npa">b</span><span class="text_added change_from_npa">B</span>eacon (see <a href="part4s.xhtml#section4S03">Section <span class="text_deleted">4L.03</span><span class="text_added">4S.03</span></a>) that flashes when the ramp control signal is in operation<span class="text_added change_from_npa"> (controlling the flow of traffic entering the freeway)</span>.<span class="text_added"> Flashing light emitting diode (LED) units shall not be used within the legend or border of the sign<span class="text_deleted change_from_npa"> to inform road users that the ramp control signal is in operation</span>.</span></span></p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>