<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  	<title>Chapter 3G - MUTCD 2009 Edition - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="content">
<h1>Chapter 3G. Colored Pavements</h1>
        
        <h3><a name="section3G01"></a>Section 3G.01 General</h3>
		<p><a href="https://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/resources/interpretations/3_09_24.htm" class="offic_interp">FHWA Official Interpretation #3(09)-24 (I) was issued on August 15, 2013 regarding the Application of Colored Pavement</a></p>
        <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/>
          <span class="paranum"><a name="section3G01_para01"></a>01</span> <span class="support">Colored pavements consist of differently colored road paving materials, such as colored asphalt or concrete, or paint or other marking materials applied to the surface of a road or island to simulate a colored pavement.</span> </p>
        <p><span class="paranum"><a name="section3G01_para02"></a>02</span> <span class="support">If non-retroreflective colored pavement, including bricks and other types of patterned surfaces, is used as a purely aesthetic treatment and is not intended to communicate a regulatory, warning, or guidance message to road users, the colored pavement is not considered to be a traffic control device, even if it is located between the lines of a crosswalk.</span></p>
        <p><span class="standard"><span class="label">Standard:</span></span><br/>
          <span class="paranum"><a name="section3G01_para03"></a>03</span> <span class="standard">If colored pavement is used within the traveled way, on flush or raised islands, or on shoulders to regulate, warn, or guide traffic or if retroreflective colored pavement is used, the colored pavement is considered to be a traffic control device and shall be limited to the following colors and applications:</span></p>
        <ol type="A" class="standard">
          <li>Yellow pavement color shall be used only for flush or raised median islands separating traffic flows in opposite directions or for left-hand shoulders of roadways of divided highways or one-way streets or ramps.</li>
          <li>White pavement color shall be used for flush or raised channelizing islands where traffic passes on both sides in the same general direction or for right-hand shoulders.</li>
        </ol>
        <p><span class="paranum"><a name="section3G01_para04"></a>04</span> <span class="standard">Colored pavements shall not be used as a traffic control device, unless the device is applicable at all times.</span></p>
        <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/>
          <span class="paranum"><a name="section3G01_para05"></a>05</span> <span class="guidance">Colored pavements used as traffic control devices should be used only where they contrast significantly with adjoining paved areas.</span></p>
        <p><span class="paranum"><a name="section3G01_para06"></a>06</span> <span class="guidance">Colored pavement located between crosswalk lines should not use colors or patterns that degrade the contrast of white crosswalk lines, or that might be mistaken by road users as a traffic control application.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/resources/interpretations/3_09_8.htm" class="offic_interp">FHWA Official Interpretation #3(09)-8 (I) was issued on May 3, 2011 regarding Colored Pavement Treatments in Crosswalks</a></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>