<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<!--?Txml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?--><!--?Txml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?--><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<link href="../Styles/mutcd.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  	<title>Chapter 5D - MUTCD 2009 Edition - FHWA</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="content">
<h1>Chapter 5D. Guide Signs</h1>
        
        <h3><a name="section5D01"></a>Section 5D.01 Introduction</h3>
        <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/>
          <span class="paranum"><a name="section5D01_para01"></a>01</span> <span class="support">The purpose of a guide sign is to inform road users regarding positions, directions, destinations, and routes.</span></p>
        <p><span class="paranum"><a name="section5D01_para02"></a>02</span> <span class="support">The provisions for guide signs, in general, are contained in <a href="part2d.xhtml">Chapters 2D</a> through <a href="part2n.xhtml">2N</a> and in other Sections of this Manual. Provisions for guide signs that are specific to low-volume roads are contained in this Chapter.</span></p>
        <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/>
          <span class="paranum"><a name="section5D01_para03"></a>03</span> <span class="guidance">The familiarity of the road users with the road should be considered in determining the need for guide signs on low-volume roads.</span></p>
        <p><span class="support"><span class="label">Support:</span></span><br/>
          <span class="paranum"><a name="section5D01_para04"></a>04</span> <span class="support">Low-volume roads generally do not require guide signs to the extent that they are needed on higher classes of roads. Because guide signs are typically only beneficial as a navigational aid for road users who are unfamiliar with a low-volume road, guide signs might not be needed on low-volume roads that serve only local traffic.</span></p>
        <p><span class="guidance"><span class="label">Guidance:</span></span><br/>
          <span class="paranum"><a name="section5D01_para05"></a>05</span> <span class="guidance">If used, destination names should be as specific and descriptive as possible. Destinations such as campgrounds, ranger stations, recreational areas, and the like should be clearly indicated so that they are not interpreted to be communities or locations with road user services.</span></p>
        <p><span class="option"><span class="label">Option:</span></span><br/>
          <span class="paranum"><a name="section5D01_para06"></a>06</span> <span class="option">Guide signs may be used at intersections to provide information for road users returning to a higher class of roads.</span></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>